---
generator: pandoc
title: inglertChapterFive_210827
viewport: width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0, user-scalable=yes
---

Chapter Five: Construction Documentation

Eric Todd Inglert, AIA

27 Aug 2021

## Field Sketches, Site Photography and the Project File

Field sketches are drawn to document the existing conditions of a
building site. During the same site visit architecture and engineering
professionals may take photographs. Along with the signed contract with
the owner for professional services, these sketches and photographs
often make up the beginning elements of the project file. Historically,
the project file was often either a manilla folder with a two-hole
punched metal clasp binder and/or a three-ring binder. In the
professional office, this project file was usually maintained by the
project architect, engineer or manager. If you were a professional
working on the job, then you would walk to the manager's desk with your
own notepad and questions to consult the project file. The file very
rarely was taken from the manager's desk! With the development of the
computer, the project file is more likely to be a directory folder in a
shared network drive. The project architect still acts as the archivist.

> Facts are important only if they are appropriate. Facts are used to
> describe the existing conditions of the site, including the physical,
> legal, climatic, and aesthetic aspects. These facts about the site
> should be documented graphically to be really effective. (Pena 2012,
> 50)

\<Insert Figure 5.1.1\>

Figure 5.1.1: Field Sketch of Shakertown Center Family Dwelling Cupola

Since the project file in whatever form is the most important living
document, then we can infer that the contents of the file have legal
consequence in the case of any disputes that may arise. Field sketches
may look informal and sometimes messy, but you should not underestimate
their importance.

> Keep all important project records. Written documentation will serve
> as proof of your firm's position in the event of any disputes. Written
> means printed, in the form of notes, letters, photographs,
> photocopies, faxes, printed e-mail, or printouts of computer files
> that are stamped with a date. (Moreno 2001, 389)

The field sketch serves several needs for the project, because the
sketch documents the existing conditions, forms a basis for subsequent
construction drawings, and is a record of the dimensional and geometric
properties that disappear once the actual construction begins. The same
can be said about the photographic record. Dimensioned and annotated
drawings in combination with the photographs represent a far better
record than faulty memories or mental images. When you are practicing
your field sketches focus on both efficiency and making a comprehensive
documentation of existing conditions. Your time will be limited on site
by the economic constraints of the project budget, yet the value of your
efforts will be equally appreciated back in the office. As you begin to
translate your notes, sketches and photographs into working documents,
each piece of observed data will allow you and your colleagues a sense
of confidence in the complex decision you must make. Unless your field
sketches are lost or are incomplete as a record, your understanding of
the existing building and site conditions will follow from a strong
foundation of professionalism. Architects, engineers, construction
managers and the clients for whom these professions serve all depend on
making quick sketches that include dimensions, annotations and accurate
graphic relationships. These sketches are supported with a photographic
record and sometimes also an audio recording or video made directly
while on site capturing initial thoughts and impressions. In this way we
can say that good architecture begins with empirical research that is
catalogued and integrated into the development of the design. Each
project is unique. Architecture reflects this deliberate focus on the
site and built context as fundamental drivers of design ideas.

### Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

#### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 5.1.2\>

Figure 5.1.2: Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

Sketch the floor plan of five living spaces. Draw freehand but make sure
the plan is proportionally correct. Include walls, openings, doors,
windows, and furniture. Include notes about the space, materials,
measurements, or other observations as you see fit. Use 1 page per
drawing. Each drawing should be approximately 10 minutes.

> The plan is a horizontal section and should be cut through the
> building at a height which goes through all wall openings, such as
> doors and windows. Show lines which occur above this section plane as
> dashed or dotted lines. (Kirby Lockard 1977, 18)

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

Going out to the field and measuring existing conditions is one of the
most common activities in a professional design office. The first step
in most projects is to photograph, measure and make drawings with notes.
These field notes are a valuable resource back in the office when we
begin to make the technical drawings.

As a professional architect who teaches architecture and engineering
students, I am often asked by people outside of the profession why we
still learn drawing by hand. In an age of computer-aided drawing, why
would a student want to know how to draw by hand when the computer is so
excellent? There are so many answers to this question, and we'll talk
about one of them now. The field sketch of existing conditions is the
most efficient, effective, and inexpensive method for verifying and
beginning a construction project. These field sketches and early
photographs are so important to the project, that they are kept in the
official job file, not to be discarded. They are an important component
of the construction documents and are legal instruments in practice. We
should learn how to gather good documentation and make effective
sketches.

#### Materials

-   Phone camera or digital camera

-   Pencil

-   Tape measure

-   Sketchbook

-   1:96 Grid Paper

#### Steps

1.  Select a large complex room with doors and windows and furniture. A
    good source for your selection is a lecture hall, library reading
    room, high-rise lobby, etc. This offers the challenge of a mid-sized
    room that is not too large to be a burden and that is more of a
    challenge than a residence.

2.  With a tape measure, identify the overall height, width, and
    openings with dimensions. Construct a floor plan freehand and pay
    particular attention to the overall proportions of the room (e.g.,
    1:1, 1:2, 1:4, 2:3, 3:4, etc.) Drawing this image freehand and with
    the grid promotes sketching precision without the need for drafting
    tools.

3.  Photograph your room from various views. These images will be useful
    to you after you have returned to the studio and wish to add notes
    and an estimate of furniture locations, etc.

4.  Taking our analysis from the general to the specific, use the tape
    measure and take important inner dimensions and note important
    relationships. Include dimensional information about the inner
    elements and details.

5.  Select four more rooms of similar description. Repeat this process
    for a total of five floor plan field sketches.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.1.3_fieldSketchFloorPlan\>

Figure 5.1.3: Video Still. Field Sketch of a Floor Plan

#### Tips

-   Taking a large clipboard to the field is useful in providing a
    mobile and hard surface to draw.

-   Photograph everything about the room. You will be glad to have the
    information when back in the studio.

#### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

#### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

### Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large Buildings

#### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 5.1.3\>

Figure Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
Buildings

Sketch two exterior building elevations of a medium to large building.
Draw freehand, do not draft. Make sure the drawing is proportionally
correct by comparing dimensions (height and width) but there's no need
to measure the space or building. Use your best judgment. Include
details of openings, windows, and doors as appropriate to the scale of
the drawing. Check with your textbook for elevation drawing conventions.
Add notes and observations to each drawing. Use 1 page per drawing. Each
drawing should be approximately 10 minutes.

> A principal view of an object projected orthographically on a vertical
> picture plane...may be a front, side, or rear view.... In
> architectural graphics, we label elevation views in relation to the
> compass directions or to a specific feature of a site. (Ching 1998,
> 125)

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

This assignment is a continuation Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor
Plans of Five Large Rooms. Please review the Scenario section for that
assignment for more information.

#### Materials

-   Phone camera or digital camera

-   Pencil

-   Tape measure

-   Sketchbook

-   1:96 Grid Paper

#### Steps

1.  Select two exterior elevations of a large and complex building.
    Again, a good source for your selection is a lecture hall, library
    reading room, high-rise lobby, etc. This offers the challenge of a
    mid-sized room that is not too large to be a burden and that is more
    of a challenge than a residence.

2.  With a tape measure, identify the overall height, width and openings
    with dimensions. Construct exterior elevations freehand and pay
    particular attention to the overall proportions of the room (e.g.,
    1:1, 1:2, 1:4, 2:3, 3:4, etc.) Drawing this image freehand and with
    the grid promotes sketching precision without the need for drafting
    tools.

3.  Photograph your room and building from various views. These images
    will be useful to you after you have returned to the studio and wish
    to add notes and an estimate of furniture locations, etc.

4.  Taking our analysis from the general to the specific, use the tape
    measure and take important inner dimensions and note important
    relationships. Include dimensional information about the inner
    elements and details.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.1.4_fieldSketchExtElevation\>

Figure 5.1.4: Video Still. Field Sketch of Exterior Elevations

#### Tips

-   Taking a large clipboard to the field is useful in providing a
    mobile and hard surface to draw.

-   Photograph everything about the room and building. You will be glad
    to have the information when back in the studio.

#### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

#### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

### Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

#### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 5.1.5\>

Figure Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large
Rooms

Sketch two interior room elevations of a medium to large building. Draw
freehand, do not draft. Make sure the drawing is proportionally correct
by comparing dimensions (height and width) but there's no need to
measure the space or building. Use your best judgment. Include details
of openings, windows, and doors as appropriate to the scale of the
drawing. Check with your textbook for elevation drawing conventions. Add
notes and observations to each drawing. Use 1 page per drawing. Each
drawing should be approximately 10 minutes.

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

This assignment is a continuation Sketches C. Field Sketches of Floor
Plans of Five Large Rooms and D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior
Elevations of Large Buildings. Please review the Scenario section for
that assignment for more information.

#### Materials

-   Phone camera or digital camera

-   Pencil

-   Tape measure

-   Sketchbook

-   1:96 Grid Paper

#### Steps

1.  Select a two interior walls in a large and complex room with doors
    and windows and furniture. A good source for your selection is a
    lecture hall, library reading room, high-rise lobby, etc. This
    offers the challenge of a mid-sized room that is not too large to be
    a burden and that is more of a challenge than a residence.

2.  With a tape measure, identify the overall height, width, and
    openings with dimensions. Construct an interior and exterior
    elevations freehand and pay particular attention to the overall
    proportions of the room (e.g., 1:1, 1:2, 1:4, 2:3, 3:4, etc.)
    Drawing this image freehand and with the grid promotes sketching
    precision without the need for drafting tools.

3.  Photograph your room and building from various views. These images
    will be useful to you after you have returned to the studio and wish
    to add notes and an estimate of furniture locations, etc.

4.  Taking our analysis from the general to the specific, use the tape
    measure and take important inner dimensions and note important
    relationships. Include dimensional information about the inner
    elements and details.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.1.6_fieldSketchIntElev\>

Figure 5.1.6: Video Still. Field Sketch of Two Interior Elevations of
Large Rooms

#### Tips

-   Taking a large clipboard to the field is useful in providing a
    mobile and hard surface to draw.

-   Photograph everything about the room and building. You will be glad
    to have the information when back in the studio.

#### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

#### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

### Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large Rooms

#### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 5.1.7\>

Figure Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of
Large Rooms

Sketch five sections of buildings and/or spaces of a large building.
Sketch loosely using your choice of media. Focus on proportion and
accuracy, using your best judgment to estimate size and scale of spaces.
Include details of openings, windows, and doors as appropriate to the
scale of the drawing. Check with your textbook for elevation drawing
conventions. Add notes and observations to each drawing. In a future
project, Exercise Eight. Rendered Section. Hybrid Drawing, we will
develop one of these sections into a larger rendered sectional drawing.
Use 1 page per drawing. Each drawing should be approximately 10 minutes.

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

This assignment is a continuation Sketches C. Field Sketches of Floor
Plans of Five Large Rooms and D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior
Elevations of Large Buildings and E. Field Sketches of Two Interior
Elevations of Large Rooms. Please review the Scenario section for that
assignment for more information.

#### Materials

-   Phone camera or digital camera

-   Pencil

-   Tape measure

-   Sketchbook

-   1:96 Grid Paper

#### Steps

1.  Select a five interior walls in a large and complex room with doors
    and windows and furniture. A good source for your selection is a
    lecture hall, library reading room, high-rise lobby, etc. This
    offers the challenge of a mid-sized room that is not too large to be
    a burden and that is more of a challenge than a residence.

2.  With a tape measure, identify the overall height, width and openings
    with dimensions. Construct a interior sections freehand and pay
    particular attention to the overall proportions of the room (e.g.,
    1:1, 1:2, 1:4, 2:3, 3:4, etc.) Drawing this image freehand and with
    the grid promotes sketching precision without the need for drafting
    tools.

3.  Photograph your room and building from various views. These images
    will be useful to you after you have returned to the studio and wish
    to add notes and an estimate of furniture locations, etc.

4.  Taking our analysis from the general to the specific, use the tape
    measure and take important inner dimensions and note important
    relationships. Include dimensional information about the inner
    elements and details.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.1.8_fieldSketchF_IntSect\>

Figure 5.1.8: Video Still. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior
Sections of Large Rooms

#### Tips

-   Taking a large clipboard to the field is useful in providing a
    mobile and hard surface to draw.

-   Photograph everything about the room and building. You will be glad
    to have the information when back in the studio.

#### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

## Construction Drawing Page Layout and Document Set Organization

### Architectural Drawing Conventions

What is a construction drawing? How does it differ from a sketch made by
a craftsman in preparation for hand or machine work?

> ...the collection of final preconstruction drawings that represent the
> building as a whole. They are the pictorial record of the official
> design for the building, and generally include detailed depictions of
> every element of the finished building...drawings are produced by the
> design team, and go through several drafts during the design phase
> before the final draft becomes part of the contract, which is then
> sent out to be bid on by contractors. The winning contractor is bound
> by all of the contract documentation, including the construction
> drawings. (Higgins 2018)

Architectural drawing conventions are a mostly standardized set of
graphic practices that describe complex technical design intentions for
construction in place. While constructors are responsible for the means
and methods of construction, these design intention documents often
imply how materials are assembled and how each is secured in place.
Engineers who subcontract to the architect and constructors who read
these drawings share a language for interpretation. Here are some useful
reference books along with place of publication that cover many of these
conventions:

-   Architectural Graphic Standards, New York

-   Neufert Architects' Data (Bauentwurfslehre,) Leipzig Germany

-   The Architect's Handbook of Professional Practice, New York

-   Time Saver Standards, New York

Wherever architects are licensed around the world, we generally find
that architectural drawing conventions are standardized. The first
architectural academy was founded at the Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris
in the 19th century. Four primary models of education developed
geographically from this initial academy: France, Britain, Germany, and
the US. This period was also fraught with colonial expansion throughout
the world, and cultural institutions were expanded along with political
and military hegemony.

It was natural that the rise of colonial expansionism, the world wars
that accompanied these ambitions, and the rebuilding efforts along with
a globalization capital and trading model would all combine to create a
set of shared architectural practices and protocols for designing and
constructing environments and buildings throughout these empires, even
long after Colonialism diminished in influence. The major exception to
this remains the Imperial vs. SI units of measurement divide.
Measurement as a principle is so fundamental to how architectural
standards are constructed that it may seem incredible that other
elements of education and practice bear so many similarities.
Nonetheless, it would be trivial for a young intern architecture student
from Middletown, USA to leave inches behind and work in millimeters in
Melbourne, Australia.

Architects, engineers, and constructors share a common language of
construction drawings, and the processes used to develop these drawings
and the protocols evident in professional design firms are remarkably
similar wherever work is being built. As we will see in subsequent
chapters, the important advances made possible by computer-aided
drawing, interdisciplinary design and shared building information
modeling assets have only served to increase architectural standards.

### Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and Interior Elevations

#### Introduction

Select one of the plans from your 5 sketchbook plans (i.e., Sketch C.
Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms) to develop into a
drafted plan and four interior elevations. Arrange the drawings on the
page in a clear order and at an appropriate scale for the space. Include
furniture, openings, doors, windows, and other details. Focus on line
weights, quality of lines, and composition to communicate the nature of
the space.

Also include a plan diagram of the space that clearly shows the
different zones of activity or information about the space that is not
readily apparent in the drafted plan. A diagram is a graphic
representation of information. Each line and symbol should convey
information about the space, relationships, and its basic design. The
final drawing will have one drafted plan four drafted interior
elevations one plan diagram.

\<Insert Figure 5.2.2_exerciseSeven\>

Figure 5.2.2: Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan
and Interior Elevations

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

\* ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing
skills that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality,
drawing notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

The defining characteristic of any construction drawing is the organized
presentation of orthographic multi-view drawings composed together in
relationships of alignment, cross-referencing, economy of presentation
and utmost precision. This requires a strong set of standards that you
must learn to become a productive professional.

Construction drawings are the instruments of service for architects and
engineers. These drawings are the primary means of communicating the
design intention to the constructors. Drawing conventions are more
standardized for construction drawings than other things we draw. There
are courses, especially at technical schools, that are dedicated to
reading construction drawings. There are generally accepted principles
for the preparation and interpretation of construction drawings.

Since architects, engineers, fabricators and constructors interact on
projects with each other, we can infer there are advantages to having a
standardized set of procedures and conventions in the preparation of
construction documents. There are very small deviations in some drawing
conventions between disciplines (e.g., architectural vs. engineering and
engineering vs. fabrication,) yet these differences are not material to
accurate comprehension of any of these technical drawings.

Interdisciplinary teams form to make our complex buildings and
structures. Teams are bound by contract law to protect all parties
engaged in the very messy business of construction. While it is beyond
the scope to discuss contracts here, an example is helpful to make the
connection between rigorous drawing standards and minimizing litigation
and disputes on the job. Traditionally there was a contract between the
architect and the owner. Separately there was a contract between the
constructor and the owner. We will skip talking about the subcontracts
(e.g., architects and engineers, constructors and fabricators, etc.)
Above the term instruments of service was used, and construction
drawings are sometimes artfully called the contract documents. In fact,
the contract between the architect and the owner usually specifies that
the contract documents consist of the signed agreement, the construction
drawings, and the material specifications. The predominant source of
litigation or a breach of contract between the architect and the owner
often points to errors and omissions in the material specifications
(written) and the construction drawings (drawings and written
information.)

Therefore, a strength of a good professional no doubt points to
characteristics of detailed attention combined with careful processes to
check for these errors and omissions. While the principles discussed in
this assignment may seem very picky, pedantic, or peculiar, there is
very good precedent for learning the precise art of making excellent
construction drawings.

It may surprise you to learn that architectural drawing conventions are
remarkably similar throughout the world. The author has taken care to
include both imperial units (i.e., feet and inches) alongside SI units
(i.e., metric), because you are likely to encounter both in your career.
Yet, this may be the greatest distinction you may find. In other words,
you could plop most architects and engineers down in a seat in a New
York, Paris, Tokyo, Mumbai, Melbourne, Cairo or Buenos Aires design
office and they could be productive in a very short time.

> Subflooring or underlayment for resilient tile, terrazzo, other finish
> flooring, should be level to within 1/8\" over a 10' length. Concrete
> slab beneath wood finish floor should be level to 1/4\" in 10'.
> (Unknown 1974, 27)

#### Materials

-   Pencil

-   Architect's scale

-   Grid paper and triangles

-   Arch B, 12\" x 18\" (A3, 297mm x 420mm) sheet

#### Steps

1.  Plan for a vellum drafting sheet size of Arch C which is 12"x18"
    (A3, 297mm x 420mm). The drawing scale is 1/8"=1'-0" or 1:96 (1:100
    in SI units.)

2.  Acquire a grid underlay guide of four cells per inch. Be aware that
    some engineering grids use five cells per inch, and this is less
    helpful. The Imperial system of measurement is based on multiples of
    4, and the metric system (SI units) are based on multiples of 10.
    Therefore, if working in SI units find millimeter grid paper.

3.  Draw a 0.9mm border line located one inch (25mm) from each edge.
    This yields a drawing area that is 10" x 16" (i.e., for A3 it is
    247mm x 370mm) available for each of six images. Alignment of these
    images is important for an organized and professional composition.
    Observe that most rooms are wider in one direction than the other;
    and since there is a requirement for two floor plan type drawings
    the wider dimension most likely runs along the x-axis. Therefore,
    most compositions favor a three row and two column organization.
    Divide the available drawing area, such that each cell has a column
    width of 8" (185mm) and a row height of 3.33" (99mm.)

4.  A good rule of thumb for many of the drawings that we do is to
    proceed from the general to the specific. The most general geometric
    description for our plans, elevations and sections is a bounding
    rectangle (i.e., what are the outer limits in terms of width and
    height of the object we are drawing.) Begin by locating each
    bounding box. Refer to Figure 5.2.2 for information about allowing
    room for dimensioning and titles.

5.  As you add detail for each drawing think of this entire process in
    three steps or phases: first, mapping phase, layout sheet for all
    drawings and block in individual cell layouts; second, construction
    phase, build appropriate detail of each drawing; third, render
    phase, add linework for clarification as well as dimensions and
    notes and captions.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.2.3_interiorConstDwg\>

Figure 5.2.3: Video Still. Interior Construction Drawing

#### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

#### Tips

1.  Refer to Figure 5.2.2: Exercise Seven. Interior Construction
    Drawing. Floor Plan and Interior Elevations for a good example of
    how to organize and coordinate plans and interior elevations.

2.  Laseau (Laseau (1989), 164-9) illustrates what he calls *ideagrams*.

3.  Since this assignment is a "sketch" drawing instead of a "drafted"
    work, then you may benefit from using a tracing grid and guide. The
    scale of each cell grid at 1/8"=1'-0" would be 2 feet per cell. If
    using metric units, then you may use millimeter grid paper, and the
    1:100 scale would be one meter per cell.

4.  If using an alternate method of creating a template sheet in a
    vector drawing program like Inkscape, print the output from the
    vector program as a PDF. When using Acrobat Reader's "poster"
    feature, it is critical that you print to a scale of 100% (i.e.,
    NOT, "to fit.")

#### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

## Sections Represent the Complexities of Architecture

A rendered interior section shows several design elements in one image.
The exterior construction is implied by the wall thickness. Several
construction elements may be inferred due to the way things like
soffits, door and window heads and heating, ventilation and air
conditioning is accommodated and drawn. Materials, textures, and colors
are rendered. This is a rich drawing.

> ...the term section typically describes a cut through the body of a
> building, perpendicular to the horizon line. A section drawing is one
> that shows a vertical cut transecting, typically along a primary axis,
> an object or building. The section reveals simultaneously its interior
> and exterior profiles, the interior space, and the material, membrane,
> or wall that separates interior from exterior, providing a view of the
> object that is not usually seen. (Lewis 2016, 6)

### Hybrid Drawings: On the Desk and Inside the Box

A hybrid is often thought of as an offspring of two parent elements.
Just as you are a hybrid of your parents, it would not be correct to say
that you express equal characteristics of mom and dad. You are more than
the sum of your parts. We have done drawings by hand, *on the desk*. We
have also begun using the computer to draw, *in the box*. There are
tell-tale characteristics of each. Many have mistakenly considered this
an either-or choice. In this course, we will think of this choice as
*both-and*!

There are two characteristics explored in this section: efficiency and
quality. It may be helpful to list some commonly held ideas.

-   Drawing with a computer is efficient over the long term, especially
    for technical drawings, complex perspective scenes and color
    renderings.

-   Drawing by hand is efficient for certain quick drawings like small
    sketches and diagrams.

-   Computer drawings have qualities such as great precision and high
    resolution.

-   Hand drawings have qualities such as friendliness, craftsmanship and
    emotional appeal.

-   Both computer and hand drawings can be impressive to clients.

Whenever these dualities are expressed, there is a tendency to argue the
merits of one over the other. If you are like the author, then you may
say why must I choose between ice cream or apple pie? Let me have apple
pie *à la Mode*!

> Visualists have been trying to reproduce the characteristics of hand
> drawing with computers for many years...hybrid imaging produces a 100
> percent computer-generated image that has an inviting quality and
> casual appearance. Hand drawing may play a minor role during initial
> visualization stages, but the computer is the primary image generator.
> \[Leggitt 2010, 210\]

Since the qualities that we discussed above are often a matter of
personal preference, then we would sometimes choose to do a drawing by
hand, and at other times to do a drawing totally in the computer. The
point is that you as the illustrator should have choices that are a
function of best fit for the project rather than a preference for using
a particular tool. For instance, if your client specifies a computer
rendering in your agreement for services, or a watercolor rendering by
hand, then you would want to meet your client's expectations. It can
matter sometimes. If you have a choice, then there is much to gain from
a hybrid approach.

Since new illustration techniques have developed with the introduction
of the computer, it has been an exciting time to make architectural
renderings. The relationship between traditional hand drawing techniques
have also evolved in a way that synthesizes the two processes into a new
hybrid practice for illustration. It is encouraging and empowering to
experiment with evolving your drawing processes from the desk, to inside
the box, and back and forth.

### Raster Graphics and Digital Painting. Introductory Techniques

In chapter two we discussed the differences between raster and vector
graphics. Here we do a deeper dive into \*painting with pixels\*. There
are some unique techniques involved with digital painting, however most
of the techniques are an attempt to emulate analogue processes. As an
example, a sophisticated watercolor technique involves the painting of
glazes. A glaze of transparent color is placed on paper and allowed to
dry. Successive transparent layers are added. Each time the previous
color is allowed to dry before applying a new glaze. Contrast this to
the idea of mixing colors wet-in-wet. One great advantage of digital
painting is that this effect can be done without the need to wait for
the paper to dry! Depending on what brush parameters and characteristics
are chosen, one can paint both glazes and wet-in-wet technique
simultaneously.

While one idea is to emulate analogue hand painting, there are many
unique things about the digital experience. The two predominant
advantages of digital painting are layer structure and advanced masking
techniques. Other important tools that you will find in all digital
painting programs include layer blend modes, filters, multi-view
interfaces, opacity, and some vector line functionality. Check out the
*Steps* section below in Exercise Eight for more detail about how to
stack effects and leveraging layers and layer masks.

### Exercise Eight. Rendered Section. Hybrid Drawing

#### Introduction

Select one of the sections that you drew in Sketch F. Field Sketches of
Five Partial Interior Sections of Large Rooms. The section must show an
opening from interior space to exterior space (door, window, balcony,
etc.) Manually draft the section on an Arch B, 12\" x 18\" (A3, 297mm x
420mm) sheet. Draft to an appropriate scale for your space. (i.e., An
example room 18' wide, or 6m, and 12' high, or 4m, would fit well at
1/2"=1'-0" (1:20 SI units.)

Scan the drawn room section and bring it into a raster-image editor
program. Render the section using the program to illustrate the space.
Include both interior and exterior in the rendering and include scale
figures. Do not worry about perspective, construction details, or
details that do not add to the basic shape and/or character of the
space. The section only needs to show the basic profile of the space or
room. The intent is to use digital graphics combined with hand drafting
to document the character of a space. The final composition can be
assessed upon the quality of the drafted section and the ability to use
a raster-image editing program to illustrate an architectural space. The
final drawing should have:

-   hand drafted section

-   scanned and imported into Photoshop

-   rendered interior

-   rendered exterior

-   1 scale figure, minimum

\<Insert Figure 5.3.1_exerciseEight\>

Figure 5.3.3: Exercise Eight. Rendered Section. Hybrid Drawing

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

\* ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing
skills that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality,
drawing notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

> At the turn of the twenty-first century a gap widened between "high
> tech" younger designers and the hands-on "low tech" veteran designers.
> Designers positioned between the two groups were the first to take
> notice and began searching for ways to integrate...new methods that
> merge traditional drawing techniques with high-tech digital tools.
> (Leggitt 2010, 8)

Artists and illustrators can leverage the speed of direct-to-paper
linework and combine it with the convenience of layering and the
powerful editing tools and filters of digital painting programs. The
hybrid nature of this drawing is two-fold: it is a construction drawing
and an illustrative rendering; and it is made using digital and analogue
drawing techniques. Whenever you can illustrate multiple design
considerations within a single drawing, we may say that it is rich and
dense with information. The drawing is suggestive of important
interrelationships. The relationships between construction, user
experience, utility and aesthetic are made evident in a rendered section
drawing, because the viewer apprehends these concepts and design
elements all at once. Therefore, when planning such a multi parameter
exposition the designer makes certain implicit claims about important
architectural juxtapositions that can be aided by such a collage
approach. The digital collage of layers is very efficient and open to
several iterations and overlays. Unless the choices of materials, colors
and textures is deliberately and carefully considered, then the collage
of design elements can seem arbitrary and unbalanced. On the other hand,
as the designer gains more confidence in this technique the rendered
interior section drawing can be one of the most influential and
descriptive architectural illustrations.

#### Materials

-   Pencil

-   Architect's scale

-   Grid paper and triangles

-   Arch B, 12\" x 18\" (A3, 297mm x 420mm) sheet

-   Raster-image editor (e.g., GIMP, Photoshop, etc.)

#### Steps

1.  Plan for a vellum drafting sheet size of Arch B which is 12"x18"
    (A3, 297mm x 420mm). The drawing scale is perhaps 1/2"=1'-0" or 1:24
    (1:20 in SI units.) Draw a larger scaled interior section than in
    Sketch F. Focus on line weight differentiation, such that all
    construction elements that are sectioned (i.e., cut-through) are a
    thick line (0.7+mm) and elements that are visible in elevation are a
    thinner line (0.35mm.)

2.  Place your drawing flat either on the ground, table or taped to the
    wall and illuminate with even and non-shadow producing light.
    Photograph with the camera on your phone using the largest physical
    lens and try to avoid using the pinch feature to zoom (i.e., digital
    zoom.)

3.  Import into the digital painting program (i.e., GIMP.) The image is
    probably larger than you need. As an example, if the original crop
    of an iPhone 12 Pro Max would result in a photo with a resolution of
    4032px x 3024px, and perhaps more than 8 Mb file, then it would be
    larger than we needed and unnecessarily burden the computer during
    our digital painting phase. A more useful maximum pixel dimension
    would be 2700 px and a corresponding file size of less than 4 Mb.

4.  Using a layering system begin to paint the walls. A common strategy
    with painters is to build from the background toward the foreground
    elements. Add another layer to add the window elements. You may want
    to find a photograph of a window element in elevation to sample and
    manipulate like an Electronic Dance Music DJ samples drum break
    beats! Have fun and bring in furniture, plants, and other entourage
    elements to enliven your scene.

5.  One requirement of this assignment is to show the outside
    environment through an opening in the wall. Use a layer mask to open
    a view to the layer below where the exterior scene you borrowed from
    a web image resource resides. Try to blur the outside layer below
    just a little and slightly desaturate the color intensity. This
    creates a perception of atmospheric perspective. Another layer
    should include at least one scale reference human silhouette that
    does not compete or dominate the architectural materials and finish.
    Adding significant blur (gaussian or motion blur) or making this
    silhouette completely gray in color can be effective.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.3.2_renderSect\>

Figure 5.3.2: Video Still. Rendered Section Drawing

#### Tips

1.  Photographing artwork is a challenge. It is far easier to correct
    for scale and perspective for instance, than it is for uneven light.
    Seek a high contrast line, a white background, and dark and clear
    lines. Remember to place a scale reference to use when adjusting in
    the digital painting program.

2.  The most useful skill to learn in digital painting is creating a
    mask. Imagine that you are viewing an interior wall. Draw a smaller
    rectangle on the wall. In your mind's eye, take some imaginary
    scissors and cut out the rectangle, so that you can see to the
    outside. In principle this is a layer mask.

3.  Layering is the predominant feature of digital painting. Again, it
    is useful to use an analogy to enable our understanding. Imagine
    that you draw a sketch of an existing exterior elevation on a piece
    of tracing paper. Tear off another sheet and tape directly over your
    sketch. On this top sheet draw a new porch design. Don't like it?
    Instead of erasing the undesirable porch design, tear off another
    sheet of tracing paper and redraw an improved design over the top of
    the sheets below and repeat this process. In the digital world, each
    new layer is analogous to each sheet of tracing paper...only MUCH
    MORE powerful!

4.  Many people love watercolor paintings. A big part of the watercolor
    aesthetic is the layering of transparent and fluid glazes that allow
    for a depth of color development over time. You can emulate this
    technique by reducing the opacity of the layers and experimenting
    with layer modes such as "multiply" and "overlay." The main point of
    this exercise is to experiment!

#### Criteria

  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                           Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                                         Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                               
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                       Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                                                    Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                  
  Rendering         Illustrator uses tone value to represent the interplay of light on volumetric forms. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                               Illustrator\'s tone value work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of tone value is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.                           Illustrator attempts to use tone value descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                 
  Technical         Modeler observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful electronic model representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of view selection, accurate translation of field notes and light source selection   Modeler observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful electronic model. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Modeler is challenged to observe and analyze field sketch correctly in the electronic model. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Modeler attempts to observe and analyze field sketch and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                                                 Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                       Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                                                    Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                             

#### Related Assignments

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Rooms

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

### References

Ching, F. & Steven Juroszek. 1998. Design Drawing. New York: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.

Higgins, A. 2018. An Introduction to the Different Types of Construction
Drawings. \[online\] Resource Center. Available at:
\<https://bim360resources.autodesk.com/connect-construct/an-introduction-to-the-different-types-of-construction-drawings\>
\[Accessed 29 August 2021\].

Kirby Lockard, William. 1977. Drawing as a Means to Architecture.
Tucson, AZ: Pepper Publishing.

Laseau, Paul. 1989. Graphic Thinking for Architects and Designers. New
York: W.W. Norton.

Leggitt, Jim. 2010. Drawing Shortcuts: Developing Quick Drawing Skills
Using Today's Technology. Second. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley; Sons, Inc.

Lewis, P. & Marc Tsurumaki & David Lewis. 2016. Manual of Section. New
York: Princeton Architectural Press.

Moreno, E. 2001. 13.2 Information Management. The Architect's Handbook
of Professional Practice. 13th ed. NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Pena, W. & Steven Parshall. 2012. Problem Seeking: An Architectural
Programming Primer. Fifth. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Unknown. 1974. Architectural Rules of Thumb. Orinda, CA: Guidelines
Publications.
