## Exercise Five. Axonometric Projection Contour Model of a Small Guest House

### Introduction

Figure 3.4: Exercise Five. Axonometric Projection Contour Model of a
Small Guest House

An "axonometric" is an orthographic paraline drawing. "Axons" are used
to describe three-dimensional characteristics of an object or spatial
relationship. Parallel lines don't converge to a vanishing point as in a
perspective drawing; rather, each line is drawn parallel. These drawings
are useful during the early visualization process of design and are
easily constructed with our studio drafting kit and a provided isometric
grid. Lines that are parallel in space are drawn parallel in the
illustration. You can measure dimensions for all axial lines -- those
parallel to any of the three principal axes. In order to draw non-axial
lines, first locate endpoints using axial measurements, then connect the
points together -- remember, non-axial lines are not measurable.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

> ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
> that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
> notation and dimensioning.

### Scenario

For many students who struggle to effectively represent their
architectural design ideas in three-dimensional perspective drawings, it
is tempting to instead build a physical model or learn an electronic
modeling computer program. In this course we will learn all three of
these skills. Each has its place. A perspective drawing is the most
efficient and effective design tool due to its relative speed to draw
and also for its ready acceptance to our clients. It more closely
resembles what we see with our eyes and in photographs. It also requires
the greatest amount of skill and sustained practice from a student, in
order for your drawing to be an effective representation of your design
idea. Perspective drawing is intimidating for the new architecture
student.

Physical models are well loved by students and our future clients alike.
Building a physical model rewards our patience and close scrutiny of the
design, due to it being the slowest and most resource intensive of all
the representation skills. Electronic modeling is both the current
state-of-the-art and the most common activity of a designer in the
studio. Students spend many late hours building beautiful models to
study in multiple views and to render in light-ray tracing programs.
These electronic models are very satisfying, rewarding and also...very
slow to produce.

As a student and before a time of computer modeling, I was introduced
early to an easy to produce and highly prized drawing in the academic
studio: the axonometric projection. These three-dimensional
representations did not exactly look like a perspective, and yet were as
easy to reproduce as straight-line plans, elevations and sections that
we were already doing. It was empowering!

> Paraline axonometrics...exhibit projectors that are perpendicular to
> the picture plane and parallel to each other...vertical front edge and
> nonconverging side planes. (Yee 2013, 175)
>
> Other schematic drawing types include the "paraline" pictorial
> drawings: axonometric (isometric, dimetric, trimetric) and various
> versions of oblique. Of these, the isometric is probably the most
> popular design and presentation device -- especially for small objects
> such as products and for schematized views of larger projects. (Oles
> 1979, 15)

As mentioned above, axonometric drawings are highly regarded in an
academic setting such as the architectural studio. Relationships between
architectural elements can be measured directly, unlike a perspective
drawing due to convergence and distortion. In particular, the isometric
exhibits a 1:1:1 measured relationship between the three axes (x, y &
z). Another valued attribute of axonometrics is the schematic and
three-dimensional diagram quality. These types of drawings are about big
ideas, and axonometrics can variously clarify problematic formal and
organizational issues and amplify the essential qualities of your
projects. As we will see in a later exercise, these drawings can be made
as exploded axonometrics and further describe the schematic qualities of
our designs. These are truly working drawings.

The 1:96 Isometric Grid Paper provided as a guide in this exercise will
allow you to draw directly in an iterative way and follow the forms
around until you have an accurate representation of your project. Like a
puzzle, it is a relaxing journey with a very satisfying finish. Take
your time, check yourself with an architect's scale often, and work the
problem until you have a correct axonometric projection. Once you are
satisfied, place the image underneath and centered in the left half of
the page and render the linework with line weight.

### Materials

-   Mechanical Pencils (0.25mm), (0.5mm) and (0.7mm)

-   Architect's scale

-   12x18 sheet

-   1:96 Isometric Grid Paper

-   Design Sketch

### Steps

1.  Begin by creating a 1\" border around your drawing sheet. Divide the
    sheet into two halves. Begin drawing 4.1 in the left half. Construct
    the view from the provided sketch and using the isometric grid you
    downloaded for this assignment.

2.  With the provided measurements draw the complex form. Use a
    hierarchy of line weights to distinguish spatial, planar and surface
    lines. Keep the drawing space empty in the right half. This area
    will be used in the next Exercise.

3.  All lines that are axial (x, y or z) may be directly measured either
    by counting grid squares or by using your architect's scale.
    Non-axial lines shall be inferred from endpoint relationships with
    other axial elements. The two roofs are good examples of this
    principle, because each is made up of constructed non-axial lines.

4.  Once the sketch is completed on the grid paper, you can slide the
    sketch underneath your final tracing paper. This is the rendering
    stage when you concentrate on line weight: spatial lines are thick
    (0.7mm,) planar lines are medium (0.5mm) and flush texture lines are
    thin (0.25mm.)

5.  Photograph or scan the full sheet when completed. The final
    submission should be saved as a raster image with pixel dimensions
    1296 px by 864 px.

### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

### Related Assignments

-   Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations
