### Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and Interior Elevations

#### Introduction

Select one of the plans from your 5 sketchbook plans (i.e., Sketch C.
Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms) to develop into a
drafted plan and four interior elevations. Arrange the drawings on the
page in a clear order and at an appropriate scale for the space. Include
furniture, openings, doors, windows, and other details. Focus on line
weights, quality of lines, and composition to communicate the nature of
the space.

Also include a plan diagram of the space that clearly shows the
different zones of activity or information about the space that is not
readily apparent in the drafted plan. A diagram is a graphic
representation of information. Each line and symbol should convey
information about the space, relationships, and its basic design. The
final drawing will have one drafted plan four drafted interior
elevations one plan diagram.

\<Insert Figure 5.2.2_exerciseSeven\>

Figure 5.2.2: Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan
and Interior Elevations

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

\* ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing
skills that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality,
drawing notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

The defining characteristic of any construction drawing is the organized
presentation of orthographic multi-view drawings composed together in
relationships of alignment, cross-referencing, economy of presentation
and utmost precision. This requires a strong set of standards that you
must learn to become a productive professional.

Construction drawings are the instruments of service for architects and
engineers. These drawings are the primary means of communicating the
design intention to the constructors. Drawing conventions are more
standardized for construction drawings than other things we draw. There
are courses, especially at technical schools, that are dedicated to
reading construction drawings. There are generally accepted principles
for the preparation and interpretation of construction drawings.

Since architects, engineers, fabricators and constructors interact on
projects with each other, we can infer there are advantages to having a
standardized set of procedures and conventions in the preparation of
construction documents. There are very small deviations in some drawing
conventions between disciplines (e.g., architectural vs. engineering and
engineering vs. fabrication,) yet these differences are not material to
accurate comprehension of any of these technical drawings.

Interdisciplinary teams form to make our complex buildings and
structures. Teams are bound by contract law to protect all parties
engaged in the very messy business of construction. While it is beyond
the scope to discuss contracts here, an example is helpful to make the
connection between rigorous drawing standards and minimizing litigation
and disputes on the job. Traditionally there was a contract between the
architect and the owner. Separately there was a contract between the
constructor and the owner. We will skip talking about the subcontracts
(e.g., architects and engineers, constructors and fabricators, etc.)
Above the term instruments of service was used, and construction
drawings are sometimes artfully called the contract documents. In fact,
the contract between the architect and the owner usually specifies that
the contract documents consist of the signed agreement, the construction
drawings, and the material specifications. The predominant source of
litigation or a breach of contract between the architect and the owner
often points to errors and omissions in the material specifications
(written) and the construction drawings (drawings and written
information.)

Therefore, a strength of a good professional no doubt points to
characteristics of detailed attention combined with careful processes to
check for these errors and omissions. While the principles discussed in
this assignment may seem very picky, pedantic, or peculiar, there is
very good precedent for learning the precise art of making excellent
construction drawings.

It may surprise you to learn that architectural drawing conventions are
remarkably similar throughout the world. The author has taken care to
include both imperial units (i.e., feet and inches) alongside SI units
(i.e., metric), because you are likely to encounter both in your career.
Yet, this may be the greatest distinction you may find. In other words,
you could plop most architects and engineers down in a seat in a New
York, Paris, Tokyo, Mumbai, Melbourne, Cairo or Buenos Aires design
office and they could be productive in a very short time.

> Subflooring or underlayment for resilient tile, terrazzo, other finish
> flooring, should be level to within 1/8\" over a 10' length. Concrete
> slab beneath wood finish floor should be level to 1/4\" in 10'.
> (Unknown 1974, 27)

#### Materials

-   Pencil

-   Architect's scale

-   Grid paper and triangles

-   Arch B, 12\" x 18\" (A3, 297mm x 420mm) sheet

#### Steps

1.  Plan for a vellum drafting sheet size of Arch C which is 12"x18"
    (A3, 297mm x 420mm). The drawing scale is 1/8"=1'-0" or 1:96 (1:100
    in SI units.)

2.  Acquire a grid underlay guide of four cells per inch. Be aware that
    some engineering grids use five cells per inch, and this is less
    helpful. The Imperial system of measurement is based on multiples of
    4, and the metric system (SI units) are based on multiples of 10.
    Therefore, if working in SI units find millimeter grid paper.

3.  Draw a 0.9mm border line located one inch (25mm) from each edge.
    This yields a drawing area that is 10" x 16" (i.e., for A3 it is
    247mm x 370mm) available for each of six images. Alignment of these
    images is important for an organized and professional composition.
    Observe that most rooms are wider in one direction than the other;
    and since there is a requirement for two floor plan type drawings
    the wider dimension most likely runs along the x-axis. Therefore,
    most compositions favor a three row and two column organization.
    Divide the available drawing area, such that each cell has a column
    width of 8" (185mm) and a row height of 3.33" (99mm.)

4.  A good rule of thumb for many of the drawings that we do is to
    proceed from the general to the specific. The most general geometric
    description for our plans, elevations and sections is a bounding
    rectangle (i.e., what are the outer limits in terms of width and
    height of the object we are drawing.) Begin by locating each
    bounding box. Refer to Figure 5.2.2 for information about allowing
    room for dimensioning and titles.

5.  As you add detail for each drawing think of this entire process in
    three steps or phases: first, mapping phase, layout sheet for all
    drawings and block in individual cell layouts; second, construction
    phase, build appropriate detail of each drawing; third, render
    phase, add linework for clarification as well as dimensions and
    notes and captions.

#### Video

\<Insert Figure 5.2.3_interiorConstDwg\>

Figure 5.2.3: Video Still. Interior Construction Drawing

#### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

#### Tips

1.  Refer to Figure 5.2.2: Exercise Seven. Interior Construction
    Drawing. Floor Plan and Interior Elevations for a good example of
    how to organize and coordinate plans and interior elevations.

2.  Laseau (Laseau (1989), 164-9) illustrates what he calls *ideagrams*.

3.  Since this assignment is a "sketch" drawing instead of a "drafted"
    work, then you may benefit from using a tracing grid and guide. The
    scale of each cell grid at 1/8"=1'-0" would be 2 feet per cell. If
    using metric units, then you may use millimeter grid paper, and the
    1:100 scale would be one meter per cell.

4.  If using an alternate method of creating a template sheet in a
    vector drawing program like Inkscape, print the output from the
    vector program as a PDF. When using Acrobat Reader's "poster"
    feature, it is critical that you print to a scale of 100% (i.e.,
    NOT, "to fit.")

#### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

