### Exercise Eight. Rendered Section. Hybrid Drawing

#### Introduction

Select one of the sections that you drew in Sketch F. Field Sketches of
Five Partial Interior Sections of Large Rooms. The section must show an
opening from interior space to exterior space (door, window, balcony,
etc.) Manually draft the section on an Arch B, 12\" x 18\" (A3, 297mm x
420mm) sheet. Draft to an appropriate scale for your space. (i.e., An
example room 18' wide, or 6m, and 12' high, or 4m, would fit well at
1/2"=1'-0" (1:20 SI units.)

Scan the drawn room section and bring it into a raster-image editor
program. Render the section using the program to illustrate the space.
Include both interior and exterior in the rendering and include scale
figures. Do not worry about perspective, construction details, or
details that do not add to the basic shape and/or character of the
space. The section only needs to show the basic profile of the space or
room. The intent is to use digital graphics combined with hand drafting
to document the character of a space. The final composition can be
assessed upon the quality of the drafted section and the ability to use
a raster-image editing program to illustrate an architectural space. The
final drawing should have:

-   hand drafted section

-   scanned and imported into Photoshop

-   rendered interior

-   rendered exterior

-   1 scale figure, minimum

\<Insert Figure 5.3.1_exerciseEight\>

Figure 5.3.3: Exercise Eight. Rendered Section. Hybrid Drawing

#### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

\* ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing
skills that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality,
drawing notation and dimensioning.

#### Scenario

> At the turn of the twenty-first century a gap widened between "high
> tech" younger designers and the hands-on "low tech" veteran designers.
> Designers positioned between the two groups were the first to take
> notice and began searching for ways to integrate...new methods that
> merge traditional drawing techniques with high-tech digital tools.
> (Leggitt 2010, 8)

Artists and illustrators can leverage the speed of direct-to-paper
linework and combine it with the convenience of layering and the
powerful editing tools and filters of digital painting programs. The
hybrid nature of this drawing is two-fold: it is a construction drawing
and an illustrative rendering; and it is made using digital and analogue
drawing techniques. Whenever you can illustrate multiple design
considerations within a single drawing, we may say that it is rich and
dense with information. The drawing is suggestive of important
interrelationships. The relationships between construction, user
experience, utility and aesthetic are made evident in a rendered section
drawing, because the viewer apprehends these concepts and design
elements all at once. Therefore, when planning such a multi parameter
exposition the designer makes certain implicit claims about important
architectural juxtapositions that can be aided by such a collage
approach. The digital collage of layers is very efficient and open to
several iterations and overlays. Unless the choices of materials, colors
and textures is deliberately and carefully considered, then the collage
of design elements can seem arbitrary and unbalanced. On the other hand,
as the designer gains more confidence in this technique the rendered
interior section drawing can be one of the most influential and
descriptive architectural illustrations.

#### Materials

-   Pencil

-   Architect's scale

-   Grid paper and triangles

-   Arch B, 12\" x 18\" (A3, 297mm x 420mm) sheet

-   Raster-image editor (e.g., GIMP, Photoshop, etc.)

#### Steps

1.  Plan for a vellum drafting sheet size of Arch B which is 12"x18"
    (A3, 297mm x 420mm). The drawing scale is perhaps 1/2"=1'-0" or 1:24
    (1:20 in SI units.) Draw a larger scaled interior section than in
    Sketch F. Focus on line weight differentiation, such that all
    construction elements that are sectioned (i.e., cut-through) are a
    thick line (0.7+mm) and elements that are visible in elevation are a
    thinner line (0.35mm.)

2.  Place your drawing flat either on the ground, table or taped to the
    wall and illuminate with even and non-shadow producing light.
    Photograph with the camera on your phone using the largest physical
    lens and try to avoid using the pinch feature to zoom (i.e., digital
    zoom.)

3.  Import into the digital painting program (i.e., GIMP.) The image is
    probably larger than you need. As an example, if the original crop
    of an iPhone 12 Pro Max would result in a photo with a resolution of
    4032px x 3024px, and perhaps more than 8 Mb file, then it would be
    larger than we needed and unnecessarily burden the computer during
    our digital painting phase. A more useful maximum pixel dimension
    would be 2700 px and a corresponding file size of less than 4 Mb.

4.  Using a layering system begin to paint the walls. A common strategy
    with painters is to build from the background toward the foreground
    elements. Add another layer to add the window elements. You may want
    to find a photograph of a window element in elevation to sample and
    manipulate like an Electronic Dance Music DJ samples drum break
    beats! Have fun and bring in furniture, plants, and other entourage
    elements to enliven your scene.

5.  One requirement of this assignment is to show the outside
    environment through an opening in the wall. Use a layer mask to open
    a view to the layer below where the exterior scene you borrowed from
    a web image resource resides. Try to blur the outside layer below
    just a little and slightly desaturate the color intensity. This
    creates a perception of atmospheric perspective. Another layer
    should include at least one scale reference human silhouette that
    does not compete or dominate the architectural materials and finish.
    Adding significant blur (gaussian or motion blur) or making this
    silhouette completely gray in color can be effective.

#### Tips

1.  Photographing artwork is a challenge. It is far easier to correct
    for scale and perspective for instance, than it is for uneven light.
    Seek a high contrast line, a white background, and dark and clear
    lines. Remember to place a scale reference to use when adjusting in
    the digital painting program.

2.  The most useful skill to learn in digital painting is creating a
    mask. Imagine that you are viewing an interior wall. Draw a smaller
    rectangle on the wall. In your mind's eye, take some imaginary
    scissors and cut out the rectangle, so that you can see to the
    outside. In principle this is a layer mask.

3.  Layering is the predominant feature of digital painting. Again, it
    is useful to use an analogy to enable our understanding. Imagine
    that you draw a sketch of an existing exterior elevation on a piece
    of tracing paper. Tear off another sheet and tape directly over your
    sketch. On this top sheet draw a new porch design. Don't like it?
    Instead of erasing the undesirable porch design, tear off another
    sheet of tracing paper and redraw an improved design over the top of
    the sheets below and repeat this process. In the digital world, each
    new layer is analogous to each sheet of tracing paper...only MUCH
    MORE powerful!

4.  Many people love watercolor paintings. A big part of the watercolor
    aesthetic is the layering of transparent and fluid glazes that allow
    for a depth of color development over time. You can emulate this
    technique by reducing the opacity of the layers and experimenting
    with layer modes such as "multiply" and "overlay." The main point of
    this exercise is to experiment!

#### Criteria

  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                           Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                                         Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                               
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                       Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                                                    Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                  
  Rendering         Illustrator uses tone value to represent the interplay of light on volumetric forms. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                               Illustrator\'s tone value work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of tone value is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.                           Illustrator attempts to use tone value descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                 
  Technical         Modeler observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful electronic model representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of view selection, accurate translation of field notes and light source selection   Modeler observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful electronic model. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Modeler is challenged to observe and analyze field sketch correctly in the electronic model. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Modeler attempts to observe and analyze field sketch and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                                                 Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                       Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                                                    Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                             

#### Related Assignments

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Rooms

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations
