---
generator: pandoc
title: Lecture Class 06.2
subtitle: Electronic Modeling Method of Perspective
viewport: width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0, user-scalable=yes
---

[Today\'s Agenda](220216_agenda.html)

<div>
![](images/Ex5-6_template.pdf)
</div>

<div>
## Electronic Modeling Method

![](images/orthoDiagramPerspective.png){width="1920"}

One of the best tools for three-dimensional visualization is an
electronic digital model. Some of these models can be created very
intuitively and quickly. Others require painstaking and arduously long
hours at the computer. The requirements for selecting one over the other
are often a function of both the stage of the architectural design and
client requirements for a presentation of the design. It is important
for guarding your precious time that you do not fall in the trap of
building a detailed computer model too soon. A much better use of your
time on the computer is to build the very basics of a three-dimensional
framework that allows you to do some previsioning and manipulation of
the model to generate your preferred view. After this very quick
modeling session it can be beneficial to "print" the framework to a
reasonable size on paper and use an overlay technique of tracing paper
refinements like the thumbnail perspective method. While it can be
immensely enjoyable to create new virtual worlds like in a Minecraft
(2021) game, you are well advised to avoid the indulgence of modeling
too much detail and progress quickly to the rendering and visioning
stages of architectural design.

One of the best pieces of advice about electronic modeling you can
follow is the idea to work as "flat" as possible for as long as
possible. What does this mean? Often the designer proceeds from a
two-dimensional multi-view orthographic drawing such as a plan, section,
or elevation. Working flat is the process of drawing rectangles, lines,
and shapes without a "Z" dimension. This process is useful because most
electronic modeling programs are *sticky* and ambiguous in the
representation of depth! What does that mean? Geometries are welded
together at vertices. When you try to move a line segment to a new
position, it can have many unintended stretching consequences.
Additionally, when we view space from a non-orthographic *perspective*
our relationship to the depth that we see may be intuitively obvious to
us, and the computer does not share our intuition. The software
developers have embedded inferences about intersecting geometries that
can sometimes be helpful. On the other hand, it can be exceptionally
frustrating when the computer gets it *wrong*! Therefore, work for as
long as possible while managing only two dimensions. When it is time to
push and pull your geometries into the z-axis, then it will be an
exceptionally satisfying experience. But wait...there's another thing to
do before that.

Since geometries tend to be joined at vertices resulting in unintended
stretching, each program you will encounter has some method of grouping
elements together into systems. You are well advised to be profligate in
your use of these groups. This is powerful modeling, and the pros make
excellent use of this kind of *templating* of components. The following
table is a guide to some common terminology for you to research and
learn the basics of making groups or components:

  -------------- ------------------
  Program Name   Element Name
  AutoCad        Block
  REVIT          Family
  SketchUp       Group, Component
  Blender        Group
  Maya           Group
  -------------- ------------------

Here are some final thoughts about the electronic modeling method. It is
much easier to create any view that you desire, and this can have some
unintended consequences. Extreme perspective distortion can be very
exciting, and when it is not a deliberate choice of the designer, it can
also be very distracting to your focus on the design. Here are a few
reminders from an earlier discussion about photography. Our most
frequent view of an object is from a standing eye-level perspective,
usually about five feet (1.5 meters) above the ground and with a 50mm
lens. This view will challenge you, because it often does not allow you
to include *everything* that you have modeled. Maintaining this view is
a good discipline, and if you are wanting to show more distortion, then
have a very good reason for that view and be deliberate in your purpose
(e.g., contrast, tension, dynamics, juxtaposition, etc.) Additionally,
use the computer as a tool. Model only the bare basics of what you need
for the purpose. As an example, in the next assignment you will be asked
to model a guest house electronically. Our main purpose here is to use
the computer as a tool to define and *design* the sun and shade
patterns. You only need the basic cubic volumes. No materials are
needed. No textures are needed. This is often referred to as a clay
model rendering, which owes its namesake to the physical modeling
material clay. Two main advantages come from this decision to be
minimalistic in your approach: it takes far less time for you to model,
and it takes far fewer resources for the computer to render the desired
image. Always remember that the goal is a tone value rendering. The
software can make this task both harder and easier. The choice is yours!
</div>
<div>
<p>[Download &mdash; blender.org](https://www.blender.org/download/)</p>
<p>[Download SketchUp Make 2017 for Windows](https://www.sketchup.com/sketchup/2017/en/sketchupmake-2017-2-2555-90782-en-x64-exe)</p>
<p>[Download SketchUp Make 2017 for Macintosh](https://www.sketchup.com/sketchup/2017/en/sketchupmake-2017-3-116-90851-en-dmg)</p>
</div>
