## Sketch K. Formal Precedent Study. Thumbnail Sketch to Contour Drawing.

\<Insert Figure 1.3.2_sketchK\>

Figure 1.3.2: Sketch K. Formal Precedent Study. Thumbnail Sketch to
Contour Drawing

### Introduction

Less content is often more informative and useful than the most
comprehensive data. As an example, an abstract drawing may offer more
knowledge than the most descriptive photograph of a building. One
purpose of drawing is not only to record the observed subject but also
to analyze and clarify what is most important. This analysis proceeds by
reduction through multiple drawing layers and iterations, which can be
considered a fundamental process of creative architectural design. The
innovations and technologies that affect how we practice our profession
have changed significantly, which has led many to question the
usefulness of drawing (esp., by hand.) Experience suggests that reliance
on electronic technologies underestimates the creative role of
\"redrawing.\" This sometimes leads to a \"kit-of-parts\" approach,
which can be a derivative and biased design viewpoint. For a student,
there is an urgent need to practice skills that promote abstract
thinking. Benefits of deliberate sketching and iterative redrawing
include greater understanding of the design problem constraints and
opportunities, improved communication, efficient management of multiple
design variables, and, well, better design thinking! This exercise will
demonstrate a deliberate and iterative approach that results in a
refined contour drawing and analysis of the formal attributes of
observed architecture.

### Scenario

How do you analyze the most essential formal attributes of architecture?
This question is important, because understanding architecture in
generalizable and abstract terms allows us to focus on design principles
(e.g., form, organization, content, composition, etc.) Abstraction helps
to diminish the \"noise\" that distracts us when working on difficult
architectural problems. What is a reliable tool for abstracting formal
meaning from the architecture we observe? The process of sketching and
iterative redrawing offers the most purposeful and efficient method,
which is consistent with the needs of design. Drawing initial thumbnail
sketches \"in the field\" or as quick visioning vignettes is a great
skill to develop. Confidence in sketching encourages us to work quickly
from idea to idea in an iterative approach. The sketches can also
leverage our communication skills and help clients understand the
designed-environment experience.

As you begin this exercise select an oblique external view of a
building, so that you can sketch a quick thumbnail drawing of the scene
in two-point perspective (i.e., step one.) The downloadable three-step
template described in the \"Steps\" section below provides a deliberate
and reliable tool for drawing a perspective of the selected building.
The tool focuses your efforts on calibrating observational skills using
analytic perspective methods. One of the most difficult and important
drawing skills to learn is how to analyze an oblique perspective of
architecture from direct observation, separating the essential
attributes from the background \"noise.\" Your focus should be to
describe the patterns made from the primary forms (e.g., surfaces, walls
and roofs) and openings (i.e., fenestration.) The process of abstraction
involves drawing and re-drawing incrementally larger views of reduced
detail with each iteration. The resulting abstract composition is a
minimalist contour drawing. The goal of this exercise is to draw an
abstract contour diagram of an oblique external view of a building in
perspective, so that the figure-ground drawing in 01.2_ModelSystems
reveals the essential formal architectural attributes.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   \...to draw effective representations of designs using professional
    architectural practices and know which techniques are most
    appropriate for a given drawing.

### Materials

-   Sketchbook

-   \"Three x 3\" template page

-   Pen

### Steps

1.  Working quickly as a sketch, use the smallest square in the template
    (i.e., thumbnail) and draw only the major horizontal and vertical
    lines.1

2.  Add the smaller shapes and tones for apertures and shadows. Complete
    the thumbnail with suggestions of materials, tonal \"color\" and
    detail.

3.  Draw a \"rule-of-thirds\" grid over the thumbnail sketch to define a
    desired composition. Transfer that grid of nine rectangles to the
    medium square.

4.  In the medium square redraw, as contours only, the primary forms
    using the transfer grid as a guide. Make \"corrections\" to the
    perspective.

5.  Scale the drawing up to the large-square size (i.e., 150%.) Center
    this under large square and trace the contour drawing and new frame.

### Tips

1.  If you don\'t have easy access to a photocopier or scanner as
    implied in step 5, then you could repeat the transfer grid process
    to enlarge the image for the final drawing. This may be a preferred
    method anyway because it gives you extra redrawing practice.

2.  This method of building sketches is comprehensively described, first
    on pages 24-5 and again on pages 34-7 (i.e., grid) in, Laseau, P.
    2004. Freehand sketching, an introduction. WW Norton and Co. NY.

3.  There is no real \"rule\" of composition, and this idea may be
    thought of as more of a guideline. It is a very familiar concept in
    photography and is a setting on most phone cameras.

### Criteria

  **DLO**           **Advanced (4 pts)**                                                                                                                                                                   **Proficient (3 pts)**                                                                                                                                          **Developing (2 pts)**                                                                                                                    **Beginner (1 pt)**
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Communication     Student demonstrates a professional communication aptitude                                                                                                                             Student demonstrates a competent level of communication skills                                                                                                  Student demonstrates a limited competency in communicating ideas                                                                          Student does not demonstrate competency in communicating ideas
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                           Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                          Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                   Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is inconsistent.
  Line              Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Lines are controlled and evoke both power and subtlety. Line is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Linework does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Lines are consistent and well-crafted. Linework has some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Lines are inconsistent and lack attention to craft.
  Professionalism   Illustrator completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                  Illustrator completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                      Illustrator generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                               Illustrator is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.

### Related Assignments

-   Sketch J. Watercolor Storyboard of Twelve Site Context Vignettes

-   Exercise Fourteen. Physical Paper Model of Formal Precedent
