## Sketch A. 50 Contour Drawings of Hands and Feet

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 2.4.4\>

Figure 2.4.4: Sketch A. Contour Line Drawings of Fifty Hands and Feet

Draw 50 contour drawings of hands and feet. Each should be done from a
different viewpoint and with different hands/feet. The first five
sketches will be blind-contour drawings of hands as a warm-up for the 45
modified contour drawings. Each drawing should take approximately 3
minutes (i.e., 2.5 hours for 50 dwgs.)

> In the hand are four bones, continuous with those of the fingers,
> called metacarpals (meta, beyond, carpus, wrist). They are covered by
> tendons on the back and on the front by tendons, the muscles of the
> thumb and little finger, and skin pads. (Bridgman 2017, 209)
>
> Repetition serves as a handprint of human intent. A phrase that might
> have sounded arbitrary the first time might come to sound purposefully
> shaped and communicative the second. (Margulis 2014)

The main purpose of this assignment is to gain facility with direct
observation through deliberate practice. That said, as an experiment you
may emulate no more than five "drawings" from a master artist from
source material. It can also be useful to learn to draw from other's
drawings. May I suggest the image tab from a Google search such as
drawings anatomy hands?

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   ... to directly observe shape and forms and measure and translate
    the spatial scene accurately from an implied image plane to a
    proportionally scaled drawn surface.

### Scenario

Gaining confidence in drawing from observation has more to do with
learning to see effectively than it does with the mechanics of drawing
well. It may be confusing for a new student to parse that line of text,
because the connection between seeing and drawing is underappreciated.
You proved in **Exercise One. Breathing Lines** that you can easily
master the mechanics of drawing lines after a relatively short amount of
practice.

Drawing from memory can be a great creative activity for a practiced
artist. For someone who is new to this, drawing from memory can be the
greatest hindrance to our development. The reason for this involves
a *perception prejudice*. It is easier for the brain to prejudge what a
hand is *supposed* to look like, than it is to actually perceive
it *correctly* enough to draw well. Close your eyes and imagine a
square. Open your eyes and draw that square. No problem, right? Close
your eyes again and imagine an eye in someone's face. Open your eyes
again and draw the eye. Does it look real? Not sure? Let's try again.
Close your eyes and imagine a town square teeming with people on market
day with tables set up with fruits and vegetables. Draw what you see.
Stressed yet?

A learned signifier for a square shape presents us with very few
differences between an actual shape that we perceive and the drawing we
made. A square is a generalization. A human eye contains relatively
fewer attributes than a crowded town square. Our generalization about an
eye may be good enough most days to make our drawing believable. On the
other hand, a crowded town square is not easily generalized with our
library of signifiers in our head. It therefore seems much more
difficult to draw.

If an artist draws directly from observation, then the square shape, the
human eye and the town square are really the same problem. The
difference in complexity of course means that the town square drawing
may take longer to complete. Technically it is no more difficult! You
probably don't believe me yet. That's OK.

> "...drawing is always the same task: to see clearly what is before
> your eyes. Sighting is an apt renamed skill. You take a sight;
> you see the thing-as-it-is..." (Edwards 1979, 130)

This assignment reminds us of playing our scales on the piano. If you
had lessons when you were young, then you remember that after several
repetitions, your hands knew where to move. The sounds you made become
more confident. While not a beautiful sonata or Broadway show tune, your
scales resembled music. You may have understood how you could *scale
up* this activity to making real music.

Let's learn how to see better. It is not an easy process to master and
has taken this author a lifetime of practice to develop confidence.
Let's remember that our goal is not mastery; rather, we intend to build
confidence and professionalism in our skills.

### Materials

-   Pencil

-   9\" x 12\" (229x304mm) sketchbook

### Steps

1.  Warm up: For your first five drawings, use the blind-contour method.
    Look only at the hand or foot you are drawing. Slowly circumscribe
    your subject first in your mind's eye and then on the paper. Never
    look at your paper to check your progress. This will instill a deep
    focus for observation, and maybe a little embarrassment! That is
    OK...keep going!

2.  The next 45 drawings use a modified contour drawing method. Look at
    your object for about 90% of your time and check your progress by
    looking at your sketchbook for only 10% of your drawing time. Each
    drawing should be a quick sketch and take between 3-5 minutes to
    complete.

3.  Keep moving your hands and feet into new poses: back of hand, fist,
    palm, holding an object, top of foot, and if flexible enough, bottom
    of foot. Use a mirror.

4.  Are you right or left-handed? Draw one of your dominant hands with
    your non-dominant hand. Is it shaky? Does it look better than your
    blind contour?

5.  Compose two or three hands to each sketchbook page. Allow them to
    overlap. Draw larger than you would initially think.

6.  When completed with your sketchbook pages, photograph each page and
    import them into an Inkscape file with "Document Properties" set to
    an 11\" x 17\" (279mm x 432mm) page. Compose and scale all your
    drawings to fit together on this one page.

7.  Export the drawing as a PNG file at 72 ppi for submission.

### Video

\<Insert Figure 2.4.4_fiftyHandsFeet\>

Figure 2.4.4: Video Still. How to Draw Fifty Hands and Feet

### Tips

-   The described method borrows much from a technique called Sight
    Sizing. It differs in one important respect, although this
    assignment could be done as a true sight sizing exercise. Our
    modified version is more accurately thought of as a relative sizing
    method.

-   Resist the urge to use technology as a guide for this project.
    Photography or drawing from image resources may seem like a good
    shortcut. Would it not be easier just to make a tracing? Remember
    that the goal here is to learn how to see, and little is learned by
    tracing or using an image reference.

### Criteria

  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                        Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                           Beginner (1 pt)
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                            Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                       Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                      Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.

### Related Assignments

-   Exercise One. Breathing Lines

-   Exercise Three. Contour Drawing of a Still Life
