---
generator: pandoc
title: inglertChaptersTwoAndThree_210531
viewport: width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0, user-scalable=yes
---

Chapter Two: Line is the Shortest Distance

Eric Todd Inglert, AIA

31 May 2021

## Introduction

We learned early in our education that a line may be defined as the
shortest distance between two points. In Chapter Three we will expand
this discussion and derive something called a \*Cuboid Generalization
Analogy\*. In that discussion it is presupposed that a point has only
one meaningful attribute, its location in an x, y & z coordinate system.
A point has no dimension or mass. May we infer that a point has little
pragmatic meaning to us without its context or relationship to another
element?

On the other hand, a line has direction. Outside of the realm of pure
mathematics, it also has several useful qualities that we can propose
below in a discussion, "What is Line Quality?" Consider line as the
fundamental syllable we utter in this language called drawing.

## Volumes = Shapes: Transformations from a 3D world to a 2D page

Architectural drawing communicates a story about our shared spatial and
experiential world. The act of drawing is a snapshot that filters the
element of time and also filters the element of depth. Here is the magic
of a good drawing: it reinterprets experiential time, and space onto the
flat plane of the drawn surface not by surrendering to those reductions
in depth; rather, drawing has the potential to amplify those very
dimensions of time and space. How you ask?

The first transformation has to do with scene selection that is
evocative of our shared experiences about interacting with the built
environment. Let's lay this aside for the moment, knowing that this will
be covered in later chapters. The second transformation is obvious to
say and less obvious to represent convincingly. Three-dimensional
volumes are translated to shapes. Spheres are circles. Cubic volumes are
polygonal shapes. The principal is this: an image plane is implied
between the viewer and the viewed object(s). Lines, vertices and curves
project onto and intersect with the imaginary image plane. Drawing is
projection. The direct mechanical analogy here is a camera. The sensor
of the camera (e.g., either unexposed film or a CCD) is a physical image
plane that captures projected and reflected light.

This course in architectural illustration and design visioning is
concerned with these two transformations and challenge you to answer two
basic questions:

1.  Temporal: How do I communicate the experience and feeling of this
    built environment?

2.  Spatial: Can I invite the viewer to move around an imaginary
    three-dimensional construct?

The most common anxiety students have in this course revolves around the
fiction of inherent artistic ability. The fallacy of the natural-born
artist assumes that one cannot overcome the *head-start* that artistic
students enjoy. This view is too narrow. It underestimates both
the *time-on-task* that so-called *natural* artists have dedicated to
developing their skill in the past. It overestimates the extent to which
architectural drawing is *art*. Finally, it equates the act of
architectural illustration with artistic skill, which is also a too
narrow definition. For our purposes, may we suspend these preconceptions
for a moment and also separate the act of marking on a surface and the
deliberate recording of an image and idea? Trusting instead in your
ability to learn new things may make your success in this class more a
function of deliberate practice (within your control)
than *talent* (outside of your control).'

## Exercise One. Breathing Lines

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 2.2\>

Figure 2.2: Exercise One. Breathing Lines Example in Felt Tip Pen on
Bristol Board

This drawing is called breathing lines, because the simple exercise of
making marks should be no more stressful than breathing. There are just
two rules for this assignment. The first rule is that no line shall
cross another line. The second rule is that a line shall be consistent
in all respects. For example, each line shall have a consistent width.
Also, each line shall be consistent and unbroken from the top of the
page to the bottom of the page. The process for making this drawing
involves making a 1/2-inch border inside an 11\" x 14\" piece of paper.
Adhesive tape shall be placed along the top margin and along the bottom
margin. While doing the drawing it is helpful to breathe out
continuously and quietly as in the film that we saw with John
Franzen (Franzen 2015)

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   ... to control line weight and consistency (e.g., width, continuity
    and control)

-   ... to abstract a simple line exercise that evokes a complex
    topography.

### Scenario

Our sole focus in this assignment is to make the most consistent marks
on a page that we can. Working slowly and with purpose and care, we
allow the pen or pencil to glide from the top of the page margin to the
bottom in one continuous motion. We are free flowing in our mind and
body. The challenging part of drawing is not mark making; rather, it is
effective *seeing*.

It may surprise you that a contemporary understanding of the
phrase *Fine Art* has less to do with a quality of *Fineness*. It has
more to do with the finality of its purpose. Most definitions of fine
art have suggested the term derived from the French, *Beaux Arts*,
concerned with aesthetic beauty and implied agreeableness. Yet we know
that much important fine art of the last 75 years and more is neither
aesthetic nor beautiful, nor agreeable! Would you permit this author a
conceit of a complementary French translation of *Fin Arts*, or art that
is an end in and of itself? For guidance we can refer to scholarship
about the philosopher Immanuel Kant.

Works of fine art, Kant is saying, like products of "agreeable art"
(angenehme Kunst), are objects designed with a view to producing a
phenomenological and physiological effect in the spectator, namely the
sensation of pleasure. But unlike "agreeable art," a work of fine art is
produced in addition with a view to engendering a certain kind of
reflective activity in spectators ("the end of the art is that the
pleasure should accompany the representations ... considered as *modes
of cognition*") ... "advancing the culture of the mental powers in the
interests of social communication." (Haskins 1989, 44)

While beautiful architectural illustrations are compelling and may seem
unattainable at your current place in your studies, freeing yourself
from the yoke of misunderstanding about artistic limitations and about
the role of illustration in our profession will help relieve you of the
burden of anxiety surrounding our work in the studio. After you complete
this project, I hope you will agree with the simple proposition that you
can *draw* effectively, inasmuch as you can make *beautiful* marks on a
page. Then we can proceed with the challenge of helping you
to *see* more deliberately and to *translate* your vision effectively to
the page.

At times, you may be compelled to think of this as an *art* class. We
will discuss in later projects an alternative view of this studio
course. Architectural illustration borrows from artistic skills, from
graphic design, from psychology and sociology, as well as from computer
arts. We will engage theories of perception, of color and of persuasion.
For the present, let us accept the proposition that this is **NOT** an
art class. There, does your technically inclined brain feel more
comfortable? Good. Now let's learn some things together and find your
vision.

### Materials

-   Pencil or felt-tip pen (0.25 or 0.35mm)

-   11\" x 14\" (279x356mm) sheet

-   drafting tape

### Steps

1.  Select a good quality paper. For this assignment you may want to use
    something like Strathmore 300 Bristol with a Vellum Surface (270
    gsm.) As this is a heavier paper, you may find it is more
    comfortable to leave this not taped to your board.

2.  With a light pencil line measure a one-half inch (12mm) border
    around the sheet on all sides. Align and place drafting tape along
    the longer axis at the top of the page and at the bottom of the
    page.

3.  Selecting the thinnest pen that you are comfortable using place the
    pen nib down within the tape border area and draw the first line on
    the left border margin if you are right-handed and on the right
    border margin if you are left-handed. Draw on top of the pencil
    border line you have made. At the end of your first stroke continue
    beyond the margin of the tape and only lift your pen within the tape
    border margin. This minimizes the "wicking" effect of the pen on the
    paper and results in a precise and implied border.

4.  Continuing across the page make your next freehand line about 0.25mm
    or less away from the first line...as close as you dare without
    touching the previous line. Continue this process and welcome the
    small variations that begin to oscillate through your process.

5.  Take periodic breaks to keep your mind and eye fresh and attend to
    the consistency of the ink pen which may dry up over time.
    Introducing a new pen to finish the drawing next to "dry" lines
    could be too abrupt.

### Video

\<Insert Figure 2.2.1_thumbnailVideoDemo\>

Figure 2.2.1: Video Still. How to Draw the Breathing Lines Assignment

### Tips

-   It may be helpful to keep your drawing clean with the use of a scrap
    of tracing paper naturally adhered by the oils on the side of your
    palm.

-   This can also ease the uncomfortable feeling of friction that you
    may experience between your palm and the paper over time.

-   The most pleasing effect combines a combination of very closely
    spaced thin lines and an oscillation effect that suggests
    topographic maps of steep mountains.

### Criteria

  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                        Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                           Beginner (1 pt)
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                            Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                       Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                      Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.

### Related Assignment

-   Exercise Two. One Hundred Lines

## A Professional Ethos for Drawing

Professional architects and engineers have developed distinguishing
characteristics and guiding ideas about what makes good drawing
practices (i.e., process,) and in turn what makes a good drawing (i.e.,
product.)

> Life is process.... To be concerned for improvement suggests a concern
> for methodology...developing skill in using the techniques that
> enhance the enjoyment of process. Products are but moments in time.
> Their value and meaning derive from process and are reapplied to
> future process.... For those who solve problems for others, as in a
> profession, documentation of process is part of the responsibility of
> such professional practice. (Koberg and Bagnall 1981, 100)

A good drawing communicates meaning through line work. What is good line
work? Good lines are consistent, purposeful and clear. A consistent line
has specific width appropriate to its purpose. A consistent line is
rendered for meaning and can range from unbroken end-to-end to a kind
of *hit-skip* line that suggests the influence of light. A
consistent *squiggly* line is not an accident of technique or failing of
confidence, rather it is an intention of mood and character. A
purposeful line communicates with the directness of all the parts of
speech and grammar that we employ in good writing and speaking. There is
a drawing vocabulary with accepted rules of usage, not dissimilar to the
way we employ words. A purposeful line communicates meaning. Clear lines
have a *purity* on the page that show we have taken care to not only
keep our drawings clean; and clear lines have a *simplicity* that
demonstrates we have taken care to be economical in our expression.

Architecture and engineering drawing borrows ideas and ideals from the
sciences and the arts. Our sketching and illustration can often seem
like we are striving for the artistic. We can be inspired by the works
and words of someone like the artist Jim Dine, who said:

> A drawing is a labor for me, not in a bad way, but in an intense way.
> I am able to search through drawing...a total connection between my
> hand and my eye.... I don't think hard work makes a good drawing. I
> have had a lot of students who worked very hard.... Drawing is not an
> exercise. Exercise is sitting on a stationary bicycle and going
> nowhere. Drawing is being on a bicycle and taking a journey. For me to
> succeed in drawing, I must go fast and arrive somewhere. The quest is
> to keep the thing alive -- the drawing and the state of grace. (Brodie
> 2004, 28)

We can just as easily lean into the words of documentation and drafting
and be inspired by the statistical sciences.

> Graphical excellence is the well-designed presentation of interesting
> data -- a matter of substance, of statistics, and of design. Graphical
> excellence consists of complex ideas communicated with clarity,
> precision and efficiency.... Graphical excellence is nearly always
> multivariate...\[and\] requires telling the truth about the
> data. (Tufte 1983, 51)

One area of particular interest to architects, engineers and landscape
architects is the National Park Service's Heritage Documentation
Programs. There are several standards that address the qualities of
drawings for documentation including the Historic American Building
Survey (HABS,) the Historic American Engineering Record (HAER,) and the
Historic American Landscape Survey (HALS.)

> As such, these guidelines represent more than 75 years of
> comprehensive experience in building documentation practice.
> Individuals and teams wishing to submit documentation for inclusion in
> the HABS Collection at the Library of Congress should review this
> document closely and are required to follow the procedures described
> therein. (National Park Service 2008)

It can be tempting for a student to believe that *good drawing* is a
matter of subjective taste. Indeed, many people think that assessing the
qualities of aesthetics and, by extension, drawing is much like trying
to guess what color the professor is thinking of right now! Burnt
Sienna.

Throughout this book you will read about the history and theory of
architectural illustration and drawing. From this, the author has
distilled some principles into rubrics that we can use together to
establish definable goals and objectives to make your drawings more
professional. It turns out that there are more things that architecture
and engineering professionals agree upon with respect to effective
drawings than perhaps in any other area of our projects. This is another
reason for setting aside the mistaken belief that what we endeavor to
learn here is about the Fine Arts, or even about being artistic. Let's
learn to be professional and effective communicators through drawing!

## Craftsmanship: Mark Making as Second Nature

For an architect or engineer, mark making is second nature to our craft.
A *maker's mark* was historically struck into metal by a goldsmith and
identified his/her personal mark. It was a sign of distinction and
pride. It signified a high level of skill and craft.

The maker's mark is a powerful metaphor of quality and can be inspiring
for our work in this studio. We can aspire both to improving our skill
and craft and someday make our mark on the profession; and the very act
of mark making (i.e., drawing on paper) is the discipline we practice
every day to achieve this goal of high craftsmanship. You can find many
examples of how this idea transcends the craft of the goldsmith.

You may not have considered the connections between professionalism and
craftsmanship. A profession is often distinct from a vocation in our
society. A doctor tends to the body, is licensed to practice and is only
called a doctor after years of academic study and internship in a
medical setting. A mechanic tends to our vehicles, may be uncredentialed
and may or may not have gone to school or apprenticed to a master
mechanic. Both the doctor and the mechanic can nonetheless exhibit
excellence and skill with their hands and with their craft.

> Given the intrinsic richness of manual work -- cognitively, socially,
> and in its broader psychic appeal -- the question becomes why it has
> suffered such a devaluation as a component of education. (Crawford
> 2009, 27--28)

The nobility of work must therefore accrue from some other place than
social capital, earned degrees or how much money one makes. Making
excellent things takes time and attention to detail. Craft is the
process for making.

Craftsmanship is an ethic and an approach to making that transcends the
divide between the ideal of the idea and the reality of the realization
of some object. Architects and engineers should attend to craftsmanship
with the same attitude of the goldsmith who strikes a mark in a finished
piece with an equal measure of humility about the experience embedded in
the work and pride for the appreciation of a job well done. Our maker's
mark is in the linework and rendering of light on the page.

## What is Line Quality? {#what-is-line-quality-1}

As we discussed, it can be tempting to think of quality as a subjective
judgment and an opinion or a personal preference, especially in an
aesthetic context. There are accepted principles of quality line work,
and we can first state them and generalize to a useful model of line
quality. Once we have established a few *rules* or principles for
architectural line work, then we can plot these ideas on a continuum
ranging from beginner, to developing, to proficient and advanced. These
levels will form the basis of rubric assessments of the learning
objectives that can be applied to and measured for each assignment.
First let's establish some goal statements about quality line work:

### Definitions and Aesthetic Goals:

-   Line weight is a phrase referring to both line width and opacity.

-   Line weight imparts meaning through dynamic tension, and a useful
    analogy for that quality is like what volume is to sound.

-   Line continuity implies both constant width and opacity.

-   Since both line weight and continuity can be varied, then we can
    assess linework within a framework of deliberate intention.

-   Do the differences in line weight and continuity follow a coherent
    system that gives meaning to a drawing?

### Goals vs. Objectives

Permit your author the first of many brief interludes. As a reminder,
goals are idealized and aspirational and describe outcomes that we hope
to accomplish over a longer time frame, for instance the length of this
course or even your university education. Goals are more open, less
focused and do not describe the processes or methods you will use to
reach the goal. A goal statement in its most structurally basic form can
be stated as a *verb-object* phrase:

-   Graduating university

-   Achieving professional licensure

-   Starting a professional practice

Objectives are measurable, more within our control and by their nature
are iterative components of a larger system pointed at achieving our
goals. You can think of an objective as a to-do list item that you have
a high probability of checking off in a shorter time frame. An
objectives statement can be written in the form of
Time:Action:Object:Metric. Here are some examples:

-   Before the scheduled deadline, complete each drawing assignment
    using the provided rubric as a guide.

-   Each night for the next couple of months, study one chapter in
    preparation for professional registration and take the practice
    exams at the end of the chapter.

-   Before talking to the bank manager, write a business plan that
    analyzes the competitive market for the professional services you
    want to offer and ask five professional colleagues to read and
    assess the plan.

What makes a good objectives statement for line quality? As you read
through the exercises there will be many objective statements that imply
good line quality. For example, here is one from an upcoming exercise,
stated first in the Time:Action:Object:Metric scaffolding, and then
verbatim as it will appear in the assignment.

1.  Before the Scheduled Deadline (Time)

2.  Control (Action)

3.  Line weight (Object)

4.  Consistent width, continuity and strength (Metric)

-   Learning Objective: As a successful student in this course, I am now
    able to control line weight and consistency (e.g., width, continuity
    and control)

-   Rubric Assessment: Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s
    attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power & subtlety.
    Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional
    goals.

### Line Quality Implies Meaning

Line is a powerful rendering tool. Architects and illustrators can
create meaning solely with the use of this dynamic tension of line work.
As we will see in later chapters, modeling our illustrations with
tone-value and color are exciting tools to render as well. Beginning
students can conflate the term *render* to mean only these tone and
color lighting effects. The exercise that you will do in this chapter
study the primary impact of line on representing form and shape. As you
work through these, try to be deliberate and systematic in your line
choices. Understand that accidental line variance, or conversely,
monotonous unvarying lines each can confuse meaning and signal
inconsistent thinking about your designs.

## Professional Results: Tips for Photographing Your Work

The most underestimated skill for success in architectural drawing is
training yourself to see effectively. The second most underestimated
skill must surely be documenting your artwork effectively. This can be
as easy as taking a photograph with the very capable smart phone in your
pocket. Two cliches come to mind:

-   The devil is in the details.

-   Garbage in...garbage out.

Achieving devilishly good images is definitely in the details, in
preparation and most importantly, the quality of the light. Editing your
photographs in a software program also comes into play, as we will
discuss here. One great advantage of our contemporary study of drawing
is the ability to upload digital images to a content management system
(e.g., Blackboard, Canvas, etc.) for assessment. Even in the past when
students submitted original artwork for a grade, there was a need to
photograph work for a portfolio that could be shared either in print
form, or as now, a digital attachment to an email or download from a
hosted web site.

### How to Get Consistently Good Photos

#### Lights

1.  If weather is permitting (e.g., dry, low wind, moderate
    temperature,) then taking photos outside is a great choice. Aim for
    the greatest light levels without glare. Often this means one of two
    things: shoot on an overcast day or shoot in the shadow of a
    building.

2.  If taking a photo inside, then control the light sources. Use a
    similar color for your lamps. New developments in LED technologies
    yield high output and good color rendition. A soft diffuser or
    something as simple as translucent tracing paper (white, not
    yellow!) can improve even spread of light.

3.  The two greatest enemies of photo correction are shadows and uneven
    light. If you do a search on a camera light stand, then you will
    notice that the standard design is to point two closely, oppositely
    positioned, and evenly lit sources at a 45-degree incident angle to
    the artwork. This reduces shadows and promotes even lighting.

#### Camera

1.  If your smart phone has multiple cameras, then use the one with the
    least *barrel distortion*. If you can barely fit the artwork in the
    frame, then this is probably the zoom lens.

2.  To clarify the point above, it is not advisable to use the *digital
    zoom* feature of your camera; rather, use the *larger glass* lens.

3.  It is most typical for a smart camera to have the ability to set the
    focus and the exposure separately. If you can learn how to do this,
    then it is optimal. Focus by touching the screen in an area of
    detail and contrast. Set the exposure by finding a middle value
    (i.e., gray if possible) and touch the screen for exposure.

4.  The brighter the lighting, the higher the implied *f-stop* of the
    camera lens and the greater the focus depth and the less the noise
    or grain. Conversely, the darker you shoot, the more bad things
    happen: 1.) gray, instead of white backgrounds; 2.) color
    aberrations and digital noise in the shadows; 3.) shallower depth of
    field with more chance for focusing issues, etc.

5.  Using a grey card positioned outside of the *crop* area is a great
    idea. If you do not have a grey card, then it is easy to make a
    quick one with a white piece of paper and a pencil. Shade a box with
    the edge of a pencil and set your exposure as suggested above to
    this *known* 50% gray.

#### Action

1.  Photo editing software comes in many flavors. As of this writing,
    the most popular choices are Lightroom (paid), Photoshop (paid) and
    GIMP (free.) Some beginning moves can also be made in the camera.

2.  Here is a proven workflow that yields consistent results:

    1.  Straighten the image using guidelines and a rotation tool

    2.  Crop the image and remove unwanted artifacts outside the
        borders.

    3.  Use either a *Curves* or *Levels* tool. Look for the eyedropper
        icon that is middle gray. Typically, there is a white, black and
        gray dropper. Touch the eyedropper to your gray card or pencil
        mark. If you have neither of these available, find something
        that is reliably "gray" in color to touch with the gray
        eyedropper. This is a powerful color correction. Finish with
        either the white dropper or the black dropper (not both!) and
        correct for the dominant issue.

    4.  If setting the white point or the black point yields poor
        results, then reach for the *Brightness and Contrast* or
        alternatively, the *Exposure* tool.

    5.  Scale the image (down!) for the selected output. The most
        important consideration is pixel width and height.

        1.  Screen Resolution: Full size at 72 ppi. An example of this
            would be an 11\" (279mm) x 17\" (432mm) original artwork
            would have a pixel dimension of 792px x 1224 px.

        2.  Print Resolution: Full size at 300 ppi. This is much larger
            and would yield an image that is 3300px x 5100px.

        3.  Upscaling is undesirable. The programs will create pixels
            for you when up sampling, but the results, absent of
            Artificial Intelligence technology, are almost always
            useless.

3.  The goals of photo editing for artwork are a *push-pull* problem:

-   Minimize distortions

-   Maximize crop choices

-   Maximize clarity

-   Minimize color aberrations

-   Maximize contrast

-   Balance darks and lights

-   Maximize resolution

**Remember:** Garbage in, garbage out. When in doubt, take another and
better photograph. Don't waste time *in the box*.

## Exercise Two. One Hundred Lines {#exercise-two.-one-hundred-lines-1}

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 2.3\>

Figure 2.3: Exercise Two. One Hundred Lines Illustrating Depth Using
Only Straight Vector Lines

Use one hundred straight lines to create a sense of depth on a
two-dimensional image plane (i.e., page.) Begin by drawing a 1/2-inch
(12mm) border around the page and then fill the frame with your
composition. Use a vector drawing program (e.g., Inkscape or Adobe
Illustrator) to make the drawing, only using straight vector linework.
Set up the artboard to an 11"x17" (e.g., ANSI B, Ledger or Tabloid) or
297x420mm (ISO 216, A3) sheet size. Familiarize yourself with the
program and experiment with line type and thickness. All linework is to
be achromatic (no color.) Print (export) the final on page to an Acrobat
PDF file.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   ... to control line weight and consistency (e.g., width, continuity
    and control) using a vector line art computer program.

-   ... to abstract a simple line exercise that evokes three-dimensional
    depth on an image plane.

### Scenario

Vector based drawings have several advantages over raster as discussed
in the section below, *Vector and Raster Graphics*. You will want to
have the ability to use both types of drawing in your illustrations.
Often the best way to learn a new software program is to try to solve a
specific and simple problem. This approach is both more enjoyable and
more challenging than reading the manual. The programs are so
comprehensive in scope, it can be overwhelming to learn everything, and
it is unnecessary to know everything.

As an example, in Inkscape the first thing you will want to know how to
do is navigate around the workspace and orient yourself to some
recognizable measurement units. Zoom in and out and pan and notice the
top and side rule bars. Notice that there are multiple ways to do the
same thing: menu drop down bars, icons and shortcut keyboard commands.
Confused yet? Good. Making mistakes and repeating them is definitely
underrated as a learning tool.

Now you will want to draw something. Let's try a rectangle. Can you find
how to query information about the rectangle? Parameters may include
line width, color, fill color or pattern, etc. Each is easily changed
once you find the dialog box. Wow, dialog boxes are powerful and can
serve as a quick way to simulate and experiment with different effects.
Everything is parameterized and seemingly accessible through a dialog
box.

OK, you are on your way. Have fun. Get frustrated. Ask each other
questions. Ask your professor a question. Do an internet search. Who
needs to read a manual? It is there if you need it. Your questions are
getting smarter. You are more efficient. You got this!

### Materials

-   Inkscape or Adobe Illustrator

### Steps

Procedure for the open-source application Inkscape ver. 1.0

-   In your sketchbook with a pencil, develop your idea of a composition
    of lines that describe spatial depth. Refer to the several
    principles referenced below (e.g., overlapping shapes, diminution,
    convergence, etc.)

-   Open Inkscape and navigate to "File -\> Document Properties." Change
    the preferred units (i.e., inches) and change paper size
    to Tabloid and orientation to Landscape.

-   Create the border with the "Rectangle" tool. Open "Object -\> Fill
    and Stroke" and select no fill and a stroke width of 0.9mm.

-   Create your lines composition with the "Bezier" tool. Use Layers to
    maintain structure and order.

-   Use three-line widths to support your composition (e.g., 0.25mm,
    0.5mm and 0.7mm).

-   Save file as either Inkscape or Plain SVG as you work.

-   When complete, "File -\> Export PNG File" and name the file and
    location. Make sure to additionally select the **Export** button.

### Video

\<Insert Figure 2.3.1_oneHundredLinesVideo\>

Figure 2.3.1: Video Still. How to Draw the One Hundred Lines Assignment

### Tips

-   Inkscape is an open-source vector graphics editor, with capabilities
    similar to Adobe Illustrator. Accessed 3 Feb 2021.
    https://inkscape.org

-   In his book Architectural Drawing, Rendow Yee covers several
    perspective cues we can use to create spatial depth on the
    paper. (Yee 2007, 228--29)

1.  Diminution

2.  Overlapping Shapes

3.  Convergence

4.  Foreshortening

-   Many of the processes in digital drawing are iterative. Since you
    repeat the same commands often, it is very useful to learn keyboard
    shortcuts.

### Criteria

  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                        Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                           Beginner (1 pt)
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                            Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                       Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                      Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Related Assignment

-   Exercise One. Breathing Lines

## Vector and Raster Graphics

For most of us, the first drawing program on the computer we encounter
is a raster painting application such as Adobe Photoshop or GIMP. Vector
based drawing apps are often considered more advanced and drawing vector
art a skill learned later in our development. This course takes a
different approach. We start with a vector line art program, (e.g.,
Inkscape or Adobe Illustrator) because it serves many immediate needs in
the studio.

Raster images are binary files on our computer with suffixes
like tif, jpg, png, etc. They are sometimes known by the descriptive
term bitmaps. It is analogous to think of a bitmap image as a map that
bridges the divide between the bits of a computer (i.e., the smallest
increment of data holding a value of "0" or "1") and a rectangular grid
of pixels mapped over the extent of the scene you want to capture. Each
pixel's color is specified by a number of bits. We project these image
maps at different resolutions, usually by downscaling a digitally stored
master captured by either the sensor of a camera or defined at the
beginning of the process of creating a pixel painting in a program. We
subsequently down sample for projecting on a screen (i.e., 72 ppi) or
printing to paper (i.e., 300 dpi.)

The CCD sensor of the Nikon D850 full frame DSLR camera is 45.4
megapixels (MP), and this measures 8256 pixels x 5504 pixels (px) with a
3:2 crop ratio. If you want to project this image onto a 1920 x 1080
computer screen, then it is most efficient to down sample the image
(\~20% of original capture,) in order to not overstrain the computer. If
you wanted to print this on a high-resolution poster to hang on your
wall, then you could down sample the original image to, let's say,
24"x18" (610mm x 457mm) at a resolution of 300dpi (\~12 ppm) with a
raster image dimension of 7200px x 5400px.

Vector images are a fundamentally different file type. Instead of a
binary file like raster images, vector art is commonly saved in a text
file. Two common suffixes for vector files are svg and pdf. The text
files are human-readable like a set of instructions, a process, and a
script of geometric movements on a cartesian coordinate system. These
scripts describe straight and curved paths and include attributes. The
greatest advantages of vector line art from our perspective are
two-fold: precision input and infinite scalability independent of
resolution. Depending on your need, the final step in projecting or
printing a vector image is to convert to a raster format. This
conversion is usually optimized automatically by the output device for
the best resolution. Here is an example excerpt of an svg file drawn
in **Inkscape**. It is a 10mm square with a 0.25mm black stroke and no
fill.

\<rect
style=\"fill:none;stroke:\#000000;stroke-width:0.0980247;stroke-miterlimit:4;stroke-dasharray:none;stroke-opacity:1\"

id=\"rect833\"

width=\"9.9019756\"

height=\"9.9019756\"

x=\"0.049012303\"

y=\"0.049012303\" /\>

Since the raster image is dimensionally defined by the width and height
of the image in pixels, then the number of bits per pixel only comes
into play when considering the output (e.g., projection and printing)
requirements. The vector image treats everything as objects, and we will
first use the program as a way to composite photographs (i.e., raster
images) of our hand-drawn artwork together onto one poster. There are
several filters available for making simple edits to our photographs.
Finally, there is a easy cropping tool available.

## Graphic Design Principles for Architectural Illustration

Over the course of these studies, you will learn graphic design
principles for architectural illustration. We have to start with
something simpler for now, and so let's discuss the elements of this
idea. It is certainly an oversimplification to say that the fundamental
design impulse is the juxtaposition of tension and release. This work
will often use analogy to talk about complex subjects in an effort to
provide an entry point for your understanding. Music is a universal
analogy.

In Western music it is common to talk about *cadence*. This word can
mean the beat or time or rhythm, variously. It has another more
interesting and specific meaning: the harmonic relationship and movement
between the dominant chord and the tonic chord. Since this is not a
music theory book, let us say only that the dominant chord can feel
unsteady and in need of resolution (i.e., tension,) and it *moves*
toward a resolution and the stability of the harmony that feels like
*home*. Think about all the songs you know and how unique each one is.
Now consider that, in the Western canon, music is dominated by twelve
unique notes of which the most common groupings or scales mostly use
seven individual notes at a time not counting repeating notes an octave
above or below the base seven notes. Finally, consider that the
essential harmonic movement is from the dominant chord to the tonic
chord. One generalization we can make from this analogy: Tension and
release creates aesthetic excitement from the simplest of rules.

Here then are some simple rules we can setup as graphic design tension
and release movements, or to borrow a phrase, *cadences*. Let's first
name the seven *notes* of our scale or elements of design as
reinterpreted from the 1941 book, *The Art of Color and Design*. (Graves
1941, xv-xvi)

1.  Line

2.  Direction

3.  Shape

4.  Proportion

5.  Texture

6.  Value

7.  Color

The essential movements from tension and release that we can make in
infinite combinatory possibilities include at least these structural
relationships in order from low to high contrast:

-   **Repetition** of like elements separated by space

-   **Harmony** or similarity of some elements and their properties

-   **Gradation** and transition toward contrast and tension

-   **Contrast** and discord, especially a lack of similarity

**Unity** is the balancing principle that exemplifies an aesthetic
gestalt of tension and release, an organized system that is experienced
as more than the sum of its parts.

## Taking Control of Your Digital Files

We will be making extensive use of digital files in this course. Before
the desktop computer, architectural and engineering firms had elaborate
data management systems. A favorite choice for the project architect or
project manager was a three-ring binder that lay on top of the desk at
the side and at hand. Each member of the team knew they could come over
and consult the project file that was tabbed with the different
sections:

-   General conditions, project number and schedule and budget

-   Contacts list, faxes and letters from clients, builders,
    administrators, consultants and vendors

-   Site conditions, Field sketches and photographs

-   As built drawings folded in a special way to fit the binder

-   Cut sheets of materials, furniture and fixtures, etc.

As the binders were filled, another was started and made available to
the team. At no time was the binder to leave the project manager's area!
Some managers preferred file cabinets with manilla folders instead of a
binder. Also at the manager's desk was the latest full-sized document
set, inclusive of blueline prints and the construction specifications.
Again, not a good idea to take them back to your desk. The project
manager had a primary role to be the custodian of the project file, the
librarian.

In the digital age many of these ideas remain and others have changed
drastically. The categories are no longer tabbed inserts in the binder;
rather, they are folders on a disk drive with shared network access.
Version control of this virtual project file is very challenging and
critical to the team. The most important thing is not which system the
project manager necessarily uses. It is most important that the manager
communicates to the team how and where files will be stored and accessed
and above all, backed up each and every night at the least.

So, what is your system? This is not optional! You must develop a system
that works for you and be consistent in how you use it. Here is an
example that you can build upon for our work:

1.  Sketchbook (Your project file!)

    -   Sketch assignments

    -   Course notes

    -   Project schedule, handwritten with annotations

    -   Printed examples glued onto blank pages with annotations

2.  Top Level Folder on your computer's hard drive

    -   **Architectural Skills**

    -   Subfolder: *Documents* for finished and scanned work

    -   Subfolder: *Images* for photographs and collected reference work

    -   Subfolder: *Movies* reference videos and demonstrations

3.  USB drive duplicated and synchronized to your computer hard drive
    structure

4.  Cloud drive automatically backing up your computer hard drive folder

5.  Naming system for files (Be descriptive)

-   YYMMDD_projectNameAuthor.ext is a good model

-   230901_exerciseTwoInglert.svg is a name that implies the following:

    -   Due on 1 September 2023

    -   Project: Exercise Two

    -   Author: Inglert

    -   Type: Scalable Vector Graphics

One final word: A working file, an archive and a backup are three
separate entities that are related to each other and are in sum the bare
minimum model from which to build your own system. There is a high
probability that one of three things will happen to you over your
studies. A hard drive will fail. An external cloud server will go
offline. Or a USB stick will be lost. The probability that all three
will happen simultaneously is extremely low. Protect your work!

## Exercise Three. Contour Drawing of Still Life from Direct Observation

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 2.4\>

Figure 2.4: Exercise Three. Contour Drawing of a Still Life

A contour drawing is an outline that describes the mass and shape of
objects. In our usage the primary outline is called the silhouette, and
it circumscribes the outermost shape of the composite of objects. In
Sketch A. Contour Line Drawings of Fifty Hands and Feet we started with
five "Blind" contour drawings where we focused only on the object and
never looked at the drawing. Modified contour drawings are freehand
drawings that split time between looking at the object and looking at
the drawing.

> "Drawing is the key to effective seeing, and seeing is the key to
> effective drawing." (Laseau 2004, 10)
>
> "There is only one way to learn to draw and that is a perfectly
> natural way. It has nothing to do with artifice or technique. It has
> nothing to do with aesthetics or conception. It has only to do with
> the act of correct observation and by that I mean a physical contact
> with all sorts of objects through all the senses.... Learning to draw
> is really a matter of learning to see -- to see correctly -- and that
> means a good deal more than merely looking with the eye. The sort of
> seeing I mean is an observation that utilizes as many of the five
> senses as can reach through the eye at one time." (Nicolaides 1969,
> xiii & 5)
>
> "You have to measure, first of all, with your eyes; and by studying
> the model judge the comparative measurements of its several masses.
> Then measure mechanically. When measuring mechanically, hold your
> charcoal or pencil between the thumb and fingers and use the first
> finger and the tip of your charcoal to mark the extremities of the
> measurement you are taking." (Bridgman 2017, 12)

In this drawing select a personal object of a relatively small scale
(bag, shoe, etc.) and draw a modified contour drawing of the object on a
9x12 sheet of quality drawing paper. Do not shade or render. Focus on
observation, clean, crisp lines, and composition of the drawing on the
page.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   ... to directly observe shape and forms and measure and translate
    the spatial scene accurately from an implied image plane to a
    proportionally scaled drawn surface.

-   ... to control line weight and consistency (e.g., width, continuity
    and control.)

### Scenario

As we learned in *Exercise One: Breathing Lines* a common anxiety many
of us share is an inaccurate belief about our ability to draw. We
learned that it was really a problem of how we *see*. When we
concentrate on drawing what we observe rather than what we think
something should look like, we are then better able to draw accurately.

In *Exercise Two: One Hundred Lines*, we learned that it was possible to
convey spatial depth with depth cues. These ideas can be strengthened
through a system of line weight or thickness. If you have had studied
mechanical drafting, then you are aware of the line weight system for
making a drawing look more professional. When we study architectural
floor plans and building sections, then we will learn a similar line
weight system. Unless you are drafting such an architectural drawing,
let's propose to follow a simple heuristic for line weight with three
rules with one special condition: 1. Lines that define the boundary
between space and object are heavy/thick. (0.7mm.) 1. Lines that mark
the boundary between two planes are medium (0.5mm.) 1. Lines that are
either textural or define two materials that are flush are thin
(0.25mm.)

-   Special condition: If it looks good, then consider making the
    silhouette discussed above the thickest line of all (i.e., 0.9mm)

### Materials

-   Pencil or felt-tip pen (0.25, 0.50mm, 0.70mm or 0.9mm)

-   11\" x 14\" (279x356mm) sheet

-   drafting tape

### Steps

1.  Since you are going to be looking very closely at your still life,
    find objects that interest you personally. Assemble your composition
    with overlapping shapes and take time to *create a
    narrative* between the objects. Creating a story can mean setting up
    several *episodes* of tension-and-release. Hard objects and soft.
    Textural and smooth. Geometric shapes and natural.

2.  Setup your drawing in a place both where it can stay for the
    duration of this long drawing and where you have a good view of the
    still life. Since this is a contour drawing, then even lighting is
    best. No shade and shadow shall be rendered.

3.  Begin by closing one eye to remove stereoscopic vision, hold your
    pencil or pen at arm's length, first vertical and then horizontal,
    and locate the *centroid* of your composition. Since your paper is a
    rectangle, then take your long metal ruler and lightly draw two
    diagonals to geometrically locate the center of your paper. Finish
    this step by drawing in freehand and very lightly a vertical line
    that passes through this center and a light horizontal through the
    same center. These are measuring lines for the following steps. Each
    one a datum of reference.

4.  Continue by concentrating on the circumscribing simple shape.
    Challenge yourself to draw a descriptive polygon of the fewest
    essential sides and focus on getting the proportion right. This is
    the most important step, because all measurements are derived from
    relationships to this shape and the centerlines.

5.  Take your time and, still with light lines, define the sub shapes of
    each object remembering to check your measurements against your
    centerlines and your circumscribing polygon. If you are comfortable
    with what you have through hard work and close observation
    transferred to the page, then you are ready to render.

6.  Rendering linework in a contour line drawing is surprisingly the
    easiest part, because we have defined a heuristic above and a
    language of line type: heavy, medium and light. Enjoy the process
    and aim for consistency.

7.  One final step is defining and scribing the silhouette line.
    Silhouette is the most important reading of shape and form from the
    perspective of the viewer. This thickest of lines should be bold and
    confident in its rendering. Oftentimes it also can appear as a
    continuous line around the still life.

### Video

\<Insert Figure 2.4_contourStillLife\>

Figure 2.4.1: Video Still. How to Draw Contour Still Life Assignment

### Tips

-   The described method borrows much from a technique called *Sight
    Sizing*. It differs in one important respect, although this
    assignment could be done as a true sight sizing exercise. Our
    modified version is more accurately thought of as a relative sizing
    method.

-   Resist the urge to use technology as a guide for this project.
    Photography or drawing from image resources may seem like a good
    shortcut. Would it not be easier just to make a tracing? Remember
    that the goal here is to learn how to see, and little is learned by
    tracing or using an image reference.

### Criteria

  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                        Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                           Beginner (1 pt)
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                            Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                       Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                      Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Two. One Hundred Lines

-   Sketch A. Contour Line Drawings of Fifty Hands and Feet

## Contour Drawing Defines Form

The silhouette of a form is the dominant reading on first encountering a
new object. The inner contours of the object reveal the
three-dimensional qualities of positive and negative space and allow us
to make sense of the object in space. Contour drawings of form are some
of the first and arguably the most important architectural drawings
students learn. Following a systematic, hands-on and learnable
technique, analytical drawing is an iterative heuristic enabling
students to discover and learn about essential form.

> Geometry is a formative idea in architecture... \[, and\] is the
> single most common determinant or characteristic in buildings. \[The
> primary purpose of contour drawing\] is to develop visual acuity and
> sensitivity to qualities of surface and form ... \[and is\] best done
> with ... a single incisive line. This fosters a feeling of precision
> that corresponds to the acuity of vision which contour drawing
> promotes. Shape is the characteristic outline or surface configuration
> ... that we organize and identify what we see .... A shape can never
> exist alone. It can only be seen in relation to other shapes or the
> space surrounding it. (Ching 1998, 17-8, 23)
>
> ...\[A\]rchitecture is engaged with fundamental existential questions.
> All experience implies the acts of recollecting, remembering and
> comparing. An embodied memory has an essential role as the basis of
> remembering a space or a place... Architecture is the art of
> reconciliation between ourselves and the world, and this mediation
> takes place through the senses. (Pallasmaa 2005, 72)

Defining Lines: Thick = Spatial, Medium = Planar and Thin = Flush

A building photograph includes visual noise, which obscures a critical
appreciation of architectural form. As we view architecture in context
or in a photograph it can be difficult to clarify the shapes of the
planes, openings and the overall silhouette. (Inglert 2014, 319) An
analytical drawing method can reveal the most essential formal qualities
of architecture. This method filters out the confusing details of
texture, tone and color and brings to the forefront the formal elements:
silhouette and shapes.

Form is the primary tool of the architect. Ching presented the elements
of form as point, line, plane and volume. (Ching1979, 18) A strong
property of both plane and form is shape, a plane's primary identifying
characteristic. (34) Continuing, Ching wrote, "\[f\]orm is the primary
identifying characteristic of a volume." (44) The silhouette of a form
may imply solid mass or void space. The silhouette, or edge contour of a
volume "... is the primary means by which we recognize and identify the
form..." of architecture. (52) However, this most elemental appreciation
of architecture may be too elusive for students when viewed from the
busy street or, second-hand, in a photograph.

Students new to architecture tend to over emphasize the importance of
architectural style and oversimplify the role of the architect and the
relevance of foundational design principles. An effective *analytique*
drawing grounds a student in a critical view toward the built
environment. This kind of formal contour drawing is an important element
of training future architects. This familiar hand-drawn analytical
drawing process, rooted in a Modernist, contour technique, emphasizes a
grammar of line weight, which reliably represents three-dimensional
space and the geometry of form. An example of the clarifying effect of
varying line weight alone illustrates the utility of the method.

There are of course other analytical methods for revealing formal
attributes, like tone-value studies. These will be covered in other
chapters. There are also reasons to combine the two
basic *analytique* types, contour and tone-value, into one drawing.

> If a sketch consists of nothing more than the outlines of
> buildings...it will communicate a certain amount of information
> regarding shape, structure, and perhaps even depth...the sketch will
> be limited in its ability to convey form and depth of space. (Brehm
> 2012, 77)

The ease of taking photographs from our phone cameras can be a tempting
shortcut for documenting our built environment. Photographs are an
important record and are encouraged as part of this process. In
understanding design principles, it can be difficult to clarify the
shapes of the planes, openings and the overall silhouette from the
*noise* that is captured in a photograph. A clear method and syntax of
analytical drawing helps a student discover the architectural signals
from the contextual noise of the image.

## Direct Observation vs. Image Resource {#direct-observation-vs.-image-resource-1}

As with many of the didactic *arguments* made in this textbook, we'll
start with a rhetorical device known as a *false dichotomy*. It is not
false in the sense that it is uncommon to hear or that it is provably
incorrect. On the contrary, just like in the previous section with our
discussion of line weight being *better* in hand drawings than on the
computer, this prejudice is often heard in the office or the art studio
and coming from the lectures of professors. It goes something like this:
"drawing from direct observation is superior to using an image
resource." What makes this a false dichotomy is the inference that one
must choose only one of these options. Why should we have to choose? Is
there a hybrid approach that takes advantage of both processes? In what
circumstances would we want to use each? Let's explore these questions.

It is an exciting experience to be an architectural designer and
illustrator now. Not only do we have at hand the traditional ways of
drawing, but we can also avail ourselves of great digital technologies.
One of the most understated, ubiquitous and maybe overlooked tools is
the *supercomputer* and high-end camera in your pocket. The advent of
high-resolution photography on a phone has improved the observational
and documentary processes of the architect in a profound way. As with
many tools, it can also be said that we can come to rely too much on it.

Learning to draw from direct observation is one of the most important
skills to develop as an artist. The challenge of translating
three-dimensional space onto a two-dimensional surface is perhaps one of
the most important innovations of the Renaissance artists. Yet, the
development of mathematical perspective should be considered in the same
light as the photograph today. Perspective systems are tools to aid the
draftsperson. The object of the exercise is still to translate the
environment to the page. Many perspective systems can seem just as
awkwardly unreal as making a tracing from a photograph when followed too
obediently.

The classic model for teaching direct observation in the atelier is
sight sizing. The artist would set up a drawing board directly in line
with the model subject, stand back and visually and mentally make
measurement and translate them to the drawing board. It is painstaking
work and a very rewarding challenge. Of course, this would be
inconvenient with landscapes and buildings! A variation of this method
is known as relative sizing. Using a process of working from major
shapes in the scenes to smaller shapes, the artist compares objects
relative sizes, estimates these relationships onto an imaginary image
plane between the scene and the artist, and sometimes employs helpful
tools to guide this work, such as using a pen as a measuring device,
squinting the eyes to simplify shapes and closing one eye to minimize
the distortions of binocular vision (i.e., parallax.) The downside of
either of these methods, of course, is that each is difficult to master
and takes much deliberate practice. In a practiced hand though there is
great vision and power in images made from direct observation.

A tempting antidote to this difficult prescription is to use
photography. Advantages of photography include helping the artist to
translate a three-dimensional scene onto an image plane, the
representational accuracy of the proportional relationships and the
ability to crop the image at any time during the exercise, to name only
a few.

Where does this leave us in the decision between direct observation
versus image resources? The purist may insist on challenging the
architectural vision using only the well-earned skills of sketching *en
plein air*. The pragmatist may come to rely on the photograph image
reference as an expedient and effective means to an end.

The middle way takes advantage of both processes. In Exercise Three, you
learned of a method for combining direct observation and photographic
resources. In the first step you find a dynamic viewpoint and context
that concentrates on a primary facade (i.e., two-thirds) of the
composition and that also includes a secondary facade. We call this an
oblique view. Sketch the silhouette, the major shapes and the minor
shapes using the direct observation techniques discussed. Once you have
a grasp on this composition, then take a photograph using the largest
lens option. In the second step, either on site or back in the studio,
make proportional corrections and revisions while adding any
contributing details that you see in the photograph (i.e., image
resource). Revision and redrawing are the most important investments you
can make in your development. During this step you may find it helpful
to overlay a piece of tracing paper on your drawing to clarify your
work. In the final step you can render in line weight as discussed in
the previous section. It can be useful to keep these three steps
distinct, as it focuses our efforts and makes the whole exercise less
overwhelming.

## Sketch A. 50 Contour Drawings of Hands and Feet

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 2.4.4\>

Figure 2.4.4: Sketch A. Contour Line Drawings of Fifty Hands and Feet

Draw 50 contour drawings of hands and feet. Each should be done from a
different viewpoint and with different hands/feet. The first five
sketches will be blind-contour drawings of hands as a warm-up for the 45
modified contour drawings. Each drawing should take approximately 3
minutes (i.e., 2.5 hours for 50 dwgs.)

> In the hand are four bones, continuous with those of the fingers,
> called metacarpals (meta, beyond, carpus, wrist). They are covered by
> tendons on the back and on the front by tendons, the muscles of the
> thumb and little finger, and skin pads. (Bridgman 2017, 209)
>
> Repetition serves as a handprint of human intent. A phrase that might
> have sounded arbitrary the first time might come to sound purposefully
> shaped and communicative the second. (Margulis 2014)

The main purpose of this assignment is to gain facility with direct
observation through deliberate practice. That said, as an experiment you
may emulate no more than five "drawings" from a master artist from
source material. It can also be useful to learn to draw from other's
drawings. May I suggest the image tab from a Google search such as
drawings anatomy hands?

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   ... to directly observe shape and forms and measure and translate
    the spatial scene accurately from an implied image plane to a
    proportionally scaled drawn surface.

### Scenario

Gaining confidence in drawing from observation has more to do with
learning to see effectively than it does with the mechanics of drawing
well. It may be confusing for a new student to parse that line of text,
because the connection between seeing and drawing is underappreciated.
You proved in **Exercise One. Breathing Lines** that you can easily
master the mechanics of drawing lines after a relatively short amount of
practice.

Drawing from memory can be a great creative activity for a practiced
artist. For someone who is new to this, drawing from memory can be the
greatest hindrance to our development. The reason for this involves
a *perception prejudice*. It is easier for the brain to prejudge what a
hand is *supposed* to look like, than it is to actually perceive
it *correctly* enough to draw well. Close your eyes and imagine a
square. Open your eyes and draw that square. No problem, right? Close
your eyes again and imagine an eye in someone's face. Open your eyes
again and draw the eye. Does it look real? Not sure? Let's try again.
Close your eyes and imagine a town square teeming with people on market
day with tables set up with fruits and vegetables. Draw what you see.
Stressed yet?

A learned signifier for a square shape presents us with very few
differences between an actual shape that we perceive and the drawing we
made. A square is a generalization. A human eye contains relatively
fewer attributes than a crowded town square. Our generalization about an
eye may be good enough most days to make our drawing believable. On the
other hand, a crowded town square is not easily generalized with our
library of signifiers in our head. It therefore seems much more
difficult to draw.

If an artist draws directly from observation, then the square shape, the
human eye and the town square are really the same problem. The
difference in complexity of course means that the town square drawing
may take longer to complete. Technically it is no more difficult! You
probably don't believe me yet. That's OK.

> "...drawing is always the same task: to see clearly what is before
> your eyes. Sighting is an apt renamed skill. You take a sight;
> you see the thing-as-it-is..." (Edwards 1979, 130)

This assignment reminds us of playing our scales on the piano. If you
had lessons when you were young, then you remember that after several
repetitions, your hands knew where to move. The sounds you made become
more confident. While not a beautiful sonata or Broadway show tune, your
scales resembled music. You may have understood how you could *scale
up* this activity to making real music.

Let's learn how to see better. It is not an easy process to master and
has taken this author a lifetime of practice to develop confidence.
Let's remember that our goal is not mastery; rather, we intend to build
confidence and professionalism in our skills.

### Materials

-   Pencil

-   9\" x 12\" (229x304mm) sketchbook

### Steps

1.  Warm up: For your first five drawings, use the blind-contour method.
    Look only at the hand or foot you are drawing. Slowly circumscribe
    your subject first in your mind's eye and then on the paper. Never
    look at your paper to check your progress. This will instill a deep
    focus for observation, and maybe a little embarrassment! That is
    OK...keep going!

2.  The next 45 drawings use a modified contour drawing method. Look at
    your object for about 90% of your time and check your progress by
    looking at your sketchbook for only 10% of your drawing time. Each
    drawing should be a quick sketch and take between 3-5 minutes to
    complete.

3.  Keep moving your hands and feet into new poses: back of hand, fist,
    palm, holding an object, top of foot, and if flexible enough, bottom
    of foot. Use a mirror.

4.  Are you right or left-handed? Draw one of your dominant hands with
    your non-dominant hand. Is it shaky? Does it look better than your
    blind contour?

5.  Compose two or three hands to each sketchbook page. Allow them to
    overlap. Draw larger than you would initially think.

6.  When completed with your sketchbook pages, photograph each page and
    import them into an Inkscape file with "Document Properties" set to
    an 11\" x 17\" (279mm x 432mm) page. Compose and scale all your
    drawings to fit together on this one page.

7.  Export the drawing as a PNG file at 72 ppi for submission.

### Video

\<Insert Figure 2.4.4_fiftyHandsFeet\>

Figure 2.4.4: Video Still. How to Draw Fifty Hands and Feet

### Tips

-   The described method borrows much from a technique called Sight
    Sizing. It differs in one important respect, although this
    assignment could be done as a true sight sizing exercise. Our
    modified version is more accurately thought of as a relative sizing
    method.

-   Resist the urge to use technology as a guide for this project.
    Photography or drawing from image resources may seem like a good
    shortcut. Would it not be easier just to make a tracing? Remember
    that the goal here is to learn how to see, and little is learned by
    tracing or using an image reference.

### Criteria

  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                        Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                           Beginner (1 pt)
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                            Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                      Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                       Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                      Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.

### Related Assignments

-   Exercise One. Breathing Lines

-   Exercise Three. Contour Drawing of a Still Life

## How to Make a Composite Drawing for your Portfolio

One of the fundamental skills architectural students must learn is how
to combine multiple drawings, images, etc. into visual sets that are
composed graphically onto a single larger board. A common phrase to hear
from both architects and students is "I'm working on a presentation
board." This can be contrasted to the business student or educator who
gives a slide presentation. Complex and creative concepts deserve a
dialogue that goes well beyond an exposition. Architectural
presentations more often use a different approach than slides.

There are several ways to communicate ideas. Nonfiction books often
proceed serially from a constructed argument formatted as claim
statements that are backed by facts. We can simplify this as thinking
that progresses along an analysis (deconstruction) to a synthesis
(reconstruction) path. Along this track we hope to transfer ourselves to
a place of new understanding. Your lab report in a science class can be
a very structured type of this argumentation method. A hypothesis
(claim) is tested and reported (data) and combined with logic and
observations (methodology) to make a conclusion about the validity of
the hypothesis. This kind of accumulated knowledge is easier to deliver
in a linear (serial) process. As the complexity and interconnectedness
of ideas increases, it becomes increasingly difficult to reduce the
ideas that we want to communicate into discrete and testable concepts.
It is important to be able to see and appreciate the entire presentation
at a glance, and to zoom in on particular details, and to revisit
complex ideas at the request of the client.

In order to take advantage of our capacity to recognize patterns from
within complex systems, we need a way to see everything at once and the
smallest of details almost simultaneously. We say almost, because it is
unlikely that the human brain can multi-task effectively like a parallel
processing computer; rather, we can at best hope to do multiple things,
poorly, at the same time. Business presentations often rely on a
narration given in front of a linear sequence of images sometimes known
as slides. This is also a common approach in education and a favorite of
many professors. The predominant software innovation for making this
presentation is known as PowerPoint.

There are several options available to the architectural designer for
compositing visual sets together into a larger presentation board. The
most obvious method is to map the information directly to a board and
draw the information directly. With the advent of several software
solutions, most of us take advantage of the layering and transform tools
in the computer. It is important to remain agnostic in this textbook
when explaining what we might think of as recipes for processes.
Therefore, Sketch A Fifty Hands and Feet uses an open source and free
software known as Inkscape. Another good open-source choice is GIMP.

### How to Make a Composite Drawing for your Portfolio

1.  Download Inkscape from https://inkscape.org/

2.  Collect image assets into a folder on your computer (i.e.,
    ./project/images)

3.  Open new document in Inkscape and save with new name in project
    folder (i.e., newBoard.svg)

4.  File --\> Document Properties Change display units and page size and
    orientation and close the dialogue box.

5.  Open Layers and create a hierarchy of layers. Some suggestions are
    \"drawings, photos, text, etc. Remember to change to the correct
    layer before importing assets.

6.  File --\> Import and hold the Ctrl button and select an arrow to
    scale the image uniformly.

7.  Wash, rinse and repeat...and save often!

## References

Brehm, M. 2012. Sketching on Location. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt
Publishers, Inc.

Bridgman, G. 2017. Bridgman's Complete Guide to Drawing from Life.
Toronto, CA: Sterling.

Brodie, J. 2004. Drawings of Jim Dine. Göttingen, Germany: Steidl
Publishers.

Ching, F. 1979. Architecture: Form, Space & Order: NY: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.

Crawford, M. 2009. Shop Class as Soulcraft. NY: The Penguin Press.

Edwards, B. 1979. Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain. Los Angeles,
CA: J.P. Tarcher, Inc.

Franzen, John. 2015. "Each Line One
Breath." 2015. <http://www.johnfranzen.com/each-line-one-breath.html>.

Graves, M. 1941. The Art of Color and Design. NY. McGraw Hill, Inc.

Haskins, Casey. 1989. "Kant and the Autonomy of Art." The Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism 47 (1):
43--54. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/431992>.

Inglert, E. 2014. Drawing Formal Massing Studies in \*archiMedia\* in
AFConline. Atlanta, GA: Design Communication Association.

Koberg, Don, and Jim Bagnall. 1981. The Revised All New Universal
Traveler. Second. Los Altos, CA: William Kaufmann, Inc.

Laseau, Paul. 2004. Freehand Sketching: An Introduction. NY: Norton.

Margulis, E. 2014. "One More
Time." 2014. <https://aeon.co/essays/why-repetition-can-turn-almost-anything-into-music>.

National Park Service, NPS. 2008. "HABS Guide to Field
Documentation." 2008. <https://www.nps.gov/hdp/standards/habsfieldguide.html>.

Nicolaides, A. 1969. The Natural Way to Draw. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin Co.

Tufte, E. 1983. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Chesire,
CT: Graphics Press.

Yee, Rendow. 2007. Architectural Drawing. A Visual Compendium of Types
and Methods. Third. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Chapter Three: Documentation and Drafting

Eric Todd Inglert, AIA

31 May 2021

## Taking the Measure of our World

Many find it useful to draw as a means to understanding. The act of
recording something to paper is a great way to remember an experience.
Drawing can also uncover hidden relationships and concepts. If you look
up the word measure and trace it to its Latin and Greek origins, you
will find that measure is related to the word meter. Both words imply an
idea of a system of understanding through standardized intervals and
bounds. There is comfort in the control that comes from circumscribing
an object and from relating that object's size and proportion to other
objects in a way that we can communicate with others.

This chapter covers several systems for taking the measure of our world.
You will come to understand multi-view drawings, parallel line drawings
and the systems of measure that we use to describe in technical detail
complex ideas. From design to construction, the hallmark of the built
environment professional, whether an architect, engineer or constructor
is the skill that we bring to imagining and translating ideas to paper
in a precise language of measured drawing. Let's begin with something
very abstract that gets at this idea of circumscribing an object. In
several exercises and sketches in this book, you will read about the
*Cuboid Generalization Analogy*. It is implied below in the isometric
grids of Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair. Let's construct a more
explicit definition of this phrase:

#### First Principles of Static Objects

1.  A point is infinitely small and has one attribute, a location in an
    (x,y,z) three-axis Cartesian coordinate system. For each triple
    let's apply a shorthand of (x,y,z)=\[A\] that describes a point
    coordinate.

2.  A line extends a point in one of the three axes. If it is a segment,
    then it can be can be defined by a tuple of point coordinates
    \[A,B\].

3.  If that line \[A,B\] is extruded perpendicular to itself, such that
    it is a planar segment, then we can locate it in space with a
    shorthand of \[(A,B)(C,D)\]. For each one of the three coordinate
    directions, let's apply three planar assignments of \[XY\] or \[XZ\]
    or \[YZ\].

4.  A cuboid extrudes a plane perpendicular to its face, and if it is
    similarly bounded in space, then we can locate it in space with a
    triple: \[(XY),(XZ),(YZ)\].

#### Generalizations

1.  A generalization abstracts and models a more complex system, reduces
    attributes, and distills objects to essential elements.

2.  If we circumscribe an object, it is meant that we draw a figure
    around the object and touch it at several points and never cut into
    that object.

3.  Four figures (e.g., shapes and volumes) are most often used to
    circumscribe another object: circle and rectangle in two-dimensions;
    and the sphere and cube in three-dimensions.

4.  Since the Cartesian Coordinate System is represented as a cubic
    grid, then a cube is a useful generalization of a complex volumetric
    form.

5.  Since a cube is strictly uniform in its dimensions, then a cuboid
    may be a more refined generalization for circumscribing complex
    non-uniform volumetric forms.

#### Cuboid Generalization Analogy

When first encountering a complex volumetric form, it is useful to
circumscribe it in a primary box, known as a cuboid, that has three
pairs of perpendicular planar faces that can be easily measured.
Subsequent iterative analysis may suggest grouping the complex
volumetric sub-elements into subsets of cuboid boxes and proceeding
toward greater levels of resolution. Since most students easily grasp
techniques for drawing realistic looking three-dimensional boxes, then
this structural generalization has great utility in the architectural
studio.

Can you apply two iterations of this Cuboid Generalization Analogy to
your complex chair? If you were effective during your field measurements
in Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair, then that is the method you
followed. It should be easier to project the three views you constructed
in the isometric to each of the three planes: Top view is \[XY\], front
view is \[XZ\] and the side view is \[YZ\]. In fact, it may be easiest
to begin the final drawing by first placing the three rectangle
projection boxes on the page in a light construction line. See the
step-by-step directions below for more detail.

### The Language of Line Type for Construction

We learned in Chapter 2 that rendering line weight in our contour
drawings makes them readable. That system proposed that spatial edges
should be thick. Planar edge conditions should be medium line weight.
Flush edges and defining detail should be thin. There is a slightly
different line weight system for parallel projection drawings that we
sometimes call construction drawings. These include drawings you may
know as plans, elevations, sections, axonometrics, etc. Many of the more
technically minded students may find these rules comforting, because of
the defined quality. Indeed, we will be using specific preferred widths
that may vary from only slightly in different professional offices. The
principle remains the same as the contour line drawing line weight
system, to allow greater legibility and understanding.

Lines that are cut through by the sectioning plane are drawn with a
thick line. If you are drafting by hand, then the most consistent way to
achieve a thick line width of 0.7mm is with a mechanical pencil,
technical pen or similar "graded" thickness instrument. Clutch pencils
may be used and require much practice to achieve a consistently thick
line width. As with all line widths discussed here, in a digital
environment it is important to define the line thickness as a parameter
for the printer to produce consistent results. These are sometimes known
as styles in the digital environment. Profiled elements in plans and
elevations, except for the outermost profile and silhouette (0.7mm),
should be drawn with a 0.5mm medium width. This is also a good line
width for notes and text that is otherwise not a caption or title. The
text height for notes typically 3/32\" (2.4mm) to 1/8\" (3.2mm) high,
and the 0.5mm medium width looks balanced. Thin lines are used for
dimension strings, notes leaders, and defining shape elements and
objects in the view that may be less emphasized. Examples of these
elements include furniture, entourage, material detail, door swings, to
name a few. Thin lines are drawn from 0.25mm to 0.35mm thickness.

It can be a struggle to learn a new office's drawing standards. It is
difficult to find the specifics of line weight within other textbooks.
In doing professional work on three continents this author has found
surprising level of consistency with these standards.

## Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 3.1.1\>

Figure 3.1.1: Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

Select a chair to document in a drafted plan, front elevation, and side
elevation. Begin by measuring the chair and recording the dimensions in
your sketchbook. Make quick sketches and detail views to record
important information. Use these "working drawings" to develop the final
drafted views.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

> ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
> that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
> notation and dimensioning.

### Scenario

Going out to the field and measuring existing conditions is one of the
most common activities in a professional design office. The first step
in most projects is to photograph, measure and make drawings with notes.
These field notes are a valuable resource back in the office when we
begin to make the technical drawings.

Since most technical drawings that designers produce for construction
are orthographic, then a good skill to develop is the translation
through drawing of three-dimensional spatial conditions to
two-dimensional projections, such as plans, sections and elevations.

As a professional architect who teaches architecture and engineering
students, I am often asked by people outside of the profession why we
still learn drawing by hand. In an age of computer-aided drawing, why
would a student want to know how to draw by hand when the computer is so
excellent? There are so many answers to this question, and we'll talk
about one of them now. The field sketch of existing conditions is the
most efficient, effective and inexpensive method for verifying and
beginning a construction project. These field sketches and early
photographs are so important to the project, that they are kept in the
official job file, not to be discarded. They are an important component
of the construction documents and are legal documents in practice. We
should learn together how to gather good documentation and make
effective sketches.

In this assignment, we'll work on a single object: a complex chair. In
several assignments coming up, we'll apply these skills to room plans,
elevations and sections in preparation for our first construction
document drawing.

### Materials

-   Phone camera or digital camera

-   Pencil

-   Tape measure

-   Sketchbook

-   1:96 Isometric Grid Paper

-   1:48 Grid Paper

### Steps

1.  Select a complex chair. A good source for your selection is an
    office chair with rolling casters. This offers the challenge of
    non-uniform shapes and complex mechanisms that make your drawing a
    more rewarding challenge than a three-legged stool for instance.

2.  With a tape measure, identify the overall height, width and chair
    dimensions. Construct a three-dimensional box of these lengths using
    the provided isometric grid. Drawing this grid freehand and with the
    isometric grid promotes sketching precision without the need for
    drafting tools.

3.  Photograph your chair from approximately the same oblique view that
    you drew the isometric container box. It is useful to also
    photograph a top view and front and side views, because these are
    the views you will draft in the related assignment, Exercise Four.
    Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection of Complex
    Chair.

4.  Transfer the silhouette (outline) of the projected view for each of
    three drawings: top view, front elevation and side elevation.
    Concentrate on the proportions of the silhouette. Sketch these on
    each of the visible faces of the isometric box. Recall that these
    are orthographic drawings, and that no perspective distortion should
    be evident.

5.  Redraw the three views on the 1:48 grid paper. The experience should
    be one of flattening the three-dimensional chair as a projection
    first on the box, and then enlarging that map at twice the scale.
    Make several notes as to materials and relevant descriptive ideas
    about the chair.

6.  Taking our analysis from the general to the specific, use the tape
    measure and take important inner dimensions and note important
    relationships. We are learning to see the chair objectively. Include
    dimensional information about the inner elements and details. When
    we do our final drawing project for the chair in Exercise Four, we
    will again redraw the three views and enlarge them to 1:12 scale.

7.  Collect all sketches and photographs together. Digitize all of the
    imagery you have made and analyses that you documented and compose
    them together onto one board. The final submission should be saved
    as a raster image with pixel dimensions 1224 px by 792 px.

### Video

\<Insert Figure 3.1.2_fieldSketchChair\>

Figure 3.1.2: Video Still. Field Sketch of a Chair

### Tips

-   Recall that these are orthographic drawings, and that no perspective
    distortion should be evident.

-   Taking a large clipboard to the field is useful in providing a
    mobile and hard surface to draw.

-   Photograph everything about the chair. You will be glad to have the
    information when back in the studio.

### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

## Geometric Transformation One: Parallel Projection

A projection system allows for the important transformation of the real
physical world into the designer's world of the documentation and
imagination of environments onto paper and screen. The two primary
geometric transformations designers and constructors use to communicate
are parallel projection and perspective projection.

By this point it may sound obvious that the activity of drawing is the
recording of a projection of the physical three-dimensional world onto a
two-dimensional plane. As we move through a spatial environment, our
eyes take a seemingly infinite number of snapshot projections capturing
light reflections onto a sensitive layer of cells called the retina. In
turn these are converted to neural signals. Our eyes capture our
environment, not literally like a net; rather, we can think of this
capture as a transformation from the physical state of *objectness* to a
geometric projection and ultimately to an idea.

Since a camera is a useful analogue for our eyes, let's use the analogy
to understand what is meant by geometric projection. When we take a
photograph with a camera, light passes through the lens and ultimately
onto a sensor "plane." Before the advent of digital image sensors, this
projection was made directly onto light sensitive film. As we will see
with a geometric projection in a later section called Perspective
Projection, the image sensor of the camera is literally a scaled mapping
of points of light reflecting onto an array of electrical receptors.
Depending on the distortions introduced by the camera lens, the results
are a very convincing and proportionate reproduction of what our eyes
perceive as reality.

Thus far our camera analogy does a good job of approximating a
perspective projection. We will explore this analogy further in the next
chapter. Let's turn our attention to what is meant by parallel
projection. A parallel projection is distinct from perspective
projection in that we can conceptualize in the mind's eye an ideal model
of our object. This model can be scaled and sliced through shared
transformation systems that have developed over the history of design
and construction.

The geometric transformation known as parallel projection encompasses
two seemingly different ideas: orthographic projection and paraline
projection. They are combined here because parallel lines in the actual
object are drawn (i.e., drafted) with parallel lines on the image.
Perspective projections as we will discover are distinguished by
representing parallel lines as converging lines to a vanishing point on
the image.

Ching (Ching 1998, 114) describes three pictorial systems: orthographic,
oblique and perspective. Orthographic drawings are called multiview
(e.g., plans, sections and elevations) and paraline are both axonometric
and oblique projections. If a perspective projection is a remapping of
the three-dimensional world to a two-dimensional image, then it is of
essence a documentation of how we naturally see the image. Parallel
projections by contrast are a construct of the imagination.

A system of rules is followed for each paraline drawing. Floor plans are
constructed with the conceit that a sliced plane is made to a building
at or around 3'-4\" (one meter) above the finish floor, such that we can
view inside the building and make scaled measurements of shapes relative
to the actual building and its components. This view is good for
building elements that can be described in the "x-y coordinate system."
Vertical section drawings have imaginary planes that cut through the
interior of the building at the discretion of the drafts person and show
variously the "x-z" and the "y-z" coordinate systems. Elevations move
the move the cutting plane outside of the building, in order to show the
faces of the building. Axonometric and oblique projections construct an
"x-y-z" grid system that assures each of the three coordinate planes has
a parallel linear relationship on the image plane consistent with
parallel lines in the actual object.

Some clients and non-professional observers of paraline projections
drawings have difficulty understanding these drawings. The distortions
caused by the rigor of drawing all parallel lines does not match up with
the converging lines we interpret on our retina. Paraline projections
are very useful to the designer and to the constructor. The ability to
make direct interpretations of measurements on a scaled drawing allows
the designer to communicate the design intent to the constructor with
great fidelity.

## Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection of Complex Chair

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 3.3\>

Figure 3.3: Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view
Projection of Complex Chair

In Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair, you selected a chair to document
in several field sketches that included a plan, front elevation, and
side elevation. From the recorded dimensions in your sketchbook develop
the final three technical views. Draw a plan, front elevation, and side
elevation of the chair at 1" = 1'-0" (1:12) on a 12x18 sheet. Compose
the three views so that they have a clear relationship to each other on
the page. Focus on quality of linework and composition of the page. Use
line weight to communicate a hierarchy of outline, edge, and detail of
the object. Do not shade or render.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

> ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
> that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
> notation and dimensioning.

### Scenario

Since most technical drawings that designers produce for construction
are orthographic, then a good skill to develop is the translation
through drawing of three-dimensional spatial conditions to
two-dimensional projections, such as plans, sections and elevations.

> In orthographic projection the picture plane intercepts parallel
> projection rays from the frontal plane of the object. The projection
> rays are always perpendicular to the picture plane.... Multiview
> projection is most often used in product design, in which accurate
> measurement and exact image representation are required.... In
> architecture...\[a\] top view is the same as a plan, and section and
> elevation are equivalent to a side view. (Wang 1979, 8--9)
>
> The main advantage of this type of drawing, and the reason why it is
> used in building construction, is that building elements are seen in
> true size (to scale), shape, and orientation when viewed from a
> perpendicular aspect. (Ching and Adams 1991, 2.2)

In this assignment, we'll work on a single object: a complex chair. In
several assignments coming up, we'll apply these skills to room plans,
elevations and sections in preparation for our first construction
document drawing.

### Materials

-   Mechanical Pencils (0.25mm), (0.5mm) and (0.7mm)

-   Architect's scale

-   12x18 sheet

-   1:12 Grid Paper

-   Field Sketches

Steps

1.  Translate the 1:48 grid drawings from Sketch B. Field Sketch of a
    Chair to 1:12 size.

2.  Draw a small 2"x3" (50mm x 75mm) thumbnail of the compositional
    design of the page. Organize the top view and the front view in one
    column. Provide three equal gutter rows between the two views.
    Likewise, organize the front view and the side view in an aligned
    row with each other. Again, provide three equal gutter columns
    between the two views. Remember to leave room for dimensioning (see
    next step) and captions for each drawing.

3.  In a light construction line, draw the bounding boxes for each of
    the three views as described above in Scenario. Leave 3/8\" (10mm)
    space between the bounding box and first dimension line. Skip
    another 3/8\" and draw a second dimension line. There will be two
    levels of dimensions for our drawing. Skip another 3/8\" space to
    find the top guideline of the caption title. The title text is
    3/16\" (5mm) in height. Below that the scale text is 3/32\" (3mm)
    height.

4.  Proceed to develop the details of each view from the field notes and
    measurements. Since we are using a freehand drafting style with a
    grid as guidance, we must take special care to draw with our light
    construction lines to be as precise with our linework as possible.

5.  The curved angles of the chair may present challenges. Take it
    slowly and deliberately. When you have an accurate outline of the
    proportions and substructures of the chair, then proceed to render
    the line work.

6.  Profiles are a thicker line (0.7mm), important planar lines are
    medium thickness (0.5mm) and textures are a finer thickness
    (0.25mm). Dimension lines are 0.25mm. Dimension hatch marks are
    thick (0.7mm). All text can be made with the medium 0.5mm thick
    pencil.

7.  Photograph or scan the full sheet when completed. The final
    submission should be saved as a raster image with pixel dimensions
    1296 px by 864 px.

### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

### Related Assignments

-   Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

## Exercise Five. Axonometric Projection Contour Model of a Small Guest House

### Introduction

\<Insert Figure 3.4\>

Figure 3.4: Exercise Five. Axonometric Projection Contour Model of a
Small Guest House

An "axonometric" is an orthographic paraline drawing. "Axons" are used
to describe three-dimensional characteristics of an object or spatial
relationship. Parallel lines don't converge to a vanishing point as in a
perspective drawing; rather, each line is drawn parallel. These drawings
are useful during the early visualization process of design and are
easily constructed with our studio drafting kit and a provided isometric
grid. Lines that are parallel in space are drawn parallel in the
illustration. You can measure dimensions for all axial lines -- those
parallel to any of the three principal axes. In order to draw non-axial
lines, first locate endpoints using axial measurements, then connect the
points together -- remember, non-axial lines are not measurable.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

> ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
> that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
> notation and dimensioning.

### Scenario

For many students who struggle to effectively represent their
architectural design ideas in three-dimensional perspective drawings, it
is tempting to instead build a physical model or learn an electronic
modeling computer program. In this course we will learn all three of
these skills. Each has its place. A perspective drawing is the most
efficient and effective design tool due to its relative speed to draw
and also for its ready acceptance to our clients. It more closely
resembles what we see with our eyes and in photographs. It also requires
the greatest amount of skill and sustained practice from a student, in
order for your drawing to be an effective representation of your design
idea. Perspective drawing is intimidating for the new architecture
student.

Physical models are well loved by students and our future clients alike.
Building a physical model rewards our patience and close scrutiny of the
design, due to it being the slowest and most resource intensive of all
the representation skills. Electronic modeling is both the current
state-of-the-art and the most common activity of a designer in the
studio. Students spend many late hours building beautiful models to
study in multiple views and to render in light-ray tracing programs.
These electronic models are very satisfying, rewarding and also...very
slow to produce.

As a student and before a time of computer modeling, I was introduced
early to an easy to produce and highly prized drawing in the academic
studio: the axonometric projection. These three-dimensional
representations did not exactly look like a perspective, and yet were as
easy to reproduce as straight-line plans, elevations and sections that
we were already doing. It was empowering!

> Paraline axonometrics...exhibit projectors that are perpendicular to
> the picture plane and parallel to each other...vertical front edge and
> nonconverging side planes. (Yee 2013, 175)
>
> Other schematic drawing types include the "paraline" pictorial
> drawings: axonometric (isometric, dimetric, trimetric) and various
> versions of oblique. Of these, the isometric is probably the most
> popular design and presentation device -- especially for small objects
> such as products and for schematized views of larger projects. (Oles
> 1979, 15)

As mentioned above, axonometric drawings are highly regarded in an
academic setting such as the architectural studio. Relationships between
architectural elements can be measured directly, unlike a perspective
drawing due to convergence and distortion. In particular, the isometric
exhibits a 1:1:1 measured relationship between the three axes (x, y &
z). Another valued attribute of axonometrics is the schematic and
three-dimensional diagram quality. These types of drawings are about big
ideas, and axonometrics can variously clarify problematic formal and
organizational issues and amplify the essential qualities of your
projects. As we will see in a later exercise, these drawings can be made
as exploded axonometrics and further describe the schematic qualities of
our designs. These are truly working drawings.

The 1:96 Isometric Grid Paper provided as a guide in this exercise will
allow you to draw directly in an iterative way and follow the forms
around until you have an accurate representation of your project. Like a
puzzle, it is a relaxing journey with a very satisfying finish. Take
your time, check yourself with an architect's scale often, and work the
problem until you have a correct axonometric projection. Once you are
satisfied, place the image underneath and centered in the left half of
the page and render the linework with line weight.

### Materials

-   Mechanical Pencils (0.25mm), (0.5mm) and (0.7mm)

-   Architect's scale

-   12x18 sheet

-   1:96 Isometric Grid Paper

-   Design Sketch

### Steps

1.  Begin by creating a 1\" border around your drawing sheet. Divide the
    sheet into two halves. Begin drawing 4.1 in the left half. Construct
    the view from the provided sketch and using the isometric grid you
    downloaded for this assignment.

2.  With the provided measurements draw the complex form. Use a
    hierarchy of line weights to distinguish spatial, planar and surface
    lines. Keep the drawing space empty in the right half. This area
    will be used in the next Exercise.

3.  All lines that are axial (x, y or z) may be directly measured either
    by counting grid squares or by using your architect's scale.
    Non-axial lines shall be inferred from endpoint relationships with
    other axial elements. The two roofs are good examples of this
    principle, because each is made up of constructed non-axial lines.

4.  Once the sketch is completed on the grid paper, you can slide the
    sketch underneath your final tracing paper. This is the rendering
    stage when you concentrate on line weight: spatial lines are thick
    (0.7mm,) planar lines are medium (0.5mm) and flush texture lines are
    thin (0.25mm.)

5.  Photograph or scan the full sheet when completed. The final
    submission should be saved as a raster image with pixel dimensions
    1296 px by 864 px.

### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

### Related Assignments

-   Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations

## References

Ching, F., and C. Adams. 1991. Building Construction Illustrated: Second
Edition. NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Ching, F., and S. Juroszek. 1998. Design Drawing. NY: John Wiley and
Sons, Inc.

Oles, PS. 1979. Architectural Illustration. The Value Delineation
Process. NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Pallasmaa, J. 2005. The Eyes of the Skin. Architecture and the Senses.
Chicester, England: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Wang, T. 1979. Plan and Section Drawing. NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

Yee, Rendow. 2013. Architectural Drawing. A Visual Compendium of Types
and Methods. Fourth. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
