## Our First Design Project. A Sense of Place Making

Architects often think in terms of "A Sense of Place." Instead of
relying on a dictionary definition of *place*, let's start with a
question. What distinguishes a place from a space? For instance, how is
your favorite location to be alone and think different than a hotel
room? Does your *place* have special meaning to you, and do you have a
unique claim to it in some way? Your place is specific, while there are
a multitude of generic hotel room spaces.

Charles Moore (1925-93,) an important 20th c. architect from the United
States, wrote in "Toward Making Places" (Moore, Lyndon, and Ryn 1962,
31)

> The architect's task is more than the manipulation of materials and
> the molding of space; it is the definition and possession of place. .
> .. A building is in a specific place to which it must specifically
> respond. Generalized forms must grow out of a thorough understanding
> of the particular place, activities, techniques of building and
> systems of service. We must start not with the geometry but with the
> user.

Because architecture is more than making beautiful sculptural forms and
more than providing an ample amount of space and even more than the sum
of its parts, then the designer could envision "sense of place" as an
organic system.

> \[Vitruvius\] identified three elements: *firmitas, utilitas, and
> venustas*. Firmness or physical strength secured the building's
> structural integrity. Utility provided an efficient arrangement of
> spaces and mechanical systems to meet the functional needs of its
> occupants. And venustas, the aesthetic quality associated with the
> goddess Venus, imparted style, proportion, and visual beauty. (Chicago
> Library 2011)

It is evident when we look at museums and sports stadia and airports
that sculptural formalism influences architects; and, it is equally
apparent that spatial concerns drive a sometimes-utilitarian character
to our schools and offices and multi-family housing.

If we integrate these ideas, then can we propose that good architecture
has the Vitruvian attributes of strength, utility and beauty (i.e.,
delight,) and it is centered on the experience of the users.
Architectural design is the activity and system by which we make good
and meaningful places. This system makes meaning through a *sense of
place*. Design activity is an organic system and thus has input and
output flows, component modules, synthesis and emergence, and it can be
mapped as a web of interconnected modules. This complexity gives design
a richness.

How do we begin to design? The question looms so large as to cause
intense panic or paralysis in most new architecture students. Many think
of design as a problem solving exercise. Koberg and Bagnall (Koberg and
Bagnall (1981), 121) developed a basic model of creative problem solving
adapted here as:

-   analysis: how to take it apart?

-   concept: what does it mean?

-   synthesis: how to put it all together?

As useful as this three-part abstraction seems at first, it can be
challenging to morph these processes into a design, because each
question has a complexity well beyond the beginning design student. In
most projects the number of unknowns far exceeds our comfort level and
obscures our path. You will learn about design tools to help you move
forward. Have you heard of "bubble diagrams" or "precedent analysis"?
These are topics we will cover in time.

Instead of getting lost in the weeds with esoteric processes, we'll
proceed with considering what we do know. Search your memory for your
favorite places. Uncover the special and unique qualities and
experiences you've had in a place. It could be in nature, a library, a
place of worship or historical site. How did that place make you feel?
What are the several things that *make* it meaningful. Write down a list
of words using your senses as much as you can. Here's one I can
remember:

\<Insert Table 1.1_senseDescription\>

  **sense**   **description**
  ----------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  sight       A late afternoon sun casts long shadows over a large square bounded at one end by a multi-domed basilica remaining in golden hour light. There is a breathtakingly large campanile tower and opening to the water just out of sight. Arcades flank three sides of the square, full of color and movement.
  hearing     People talking and laughing, birds flutter and call out. There are sounds of boats, plates being delivered and music and laughter.
  smell       So many different scents: food from all over the world, coffee, petrol fumes, cigarette smoke and perfumes and body odor.
  taste       The espresso tastes rich on the tongue after the delicious pasta and cream sauce. The early evening air tastes of a hint of rain, or is that the dankness of the canals?
  touch       Feet pad over the rough pavers of differing textures, and hands brush the stone columns. Bodies jostle for position and my trusty camera and sketchbook bounce against my side in a day bag that feels heavy after all the sight- seeing.

Table 1.1: Sense: Description Exercise

Shall we suspend for a moment the presumption of design leading straight
as an arrow to the *problem solution*? Experience has shown that, unlike
your calculus homework, a *correct* design solution may be an elusive
target. Alternately, let's think of successful design as exhibiting an
optimal balance and fit of embodied sensate intention and begin by
asking ourselves how we define a sense of place. Can you relate to the
above descriptions in your imagination? Even if you have never been to
the Piazza San Marco in Venice, you can draw on your senses and memories
and recreate the sense of this place. What is interesting about this
exercise is that it does not imply specific forms, styles, materials or
spatial allocations.

## An Overview of Three Overlapping Architectural Design Theories: Defining Good Questions

The observational method we explored in the above Sense Table Exercise
situates our inquiry within *empiricism*. We used our senses to describe
observable facts. Not all architectural theory is grounded in observable
phenomena. For an alternative context, we could identify theoretical
arguments that rely on logical frameworks and sometimes unobservable
phenomena and thus situated within an epistemology of *rationalism*.

...to come to the same assessment of a hypothesis, each
must *interpret* the observed phenomena in the same way. Differences of
interpretation will become evident in the way these details are
described with *precision*. Moreover, the precise way these details are
described depends on the entire *theory* within which the hypothesis is
set. A **theory** is a systematically integrated set of general
principles, methods of investigation, and concepts whose function is to
explain a wide array of phenomena. Theories generate hypotheses about
specific phenomena, but, significantly, they also provide the filter or
lenses through which we interpret the observations that test
hypotheses. (Hughes and Lavery 2004, 244)

It was tempting for theorists to talk about Modernism of the 20th
century in rationalist terms. Popular phrases arising from this tendency
included, "Form Ever Follows Function" from US architect Louis Sullivan
(1856-1924), "Less is more" from German architect Ludwig Mies van der
Rohe (1886--1969) and "The house is a machine for living in" from French
architect Le Corbusier (1887-1965.) Each of these ideas reflected a
reductivism and theory of architecture that proved compelling to many
architects, and yet could sometimes be too elusive, abstract and
esoteric to appreciate by those who lived in the architecture. Rather
than debate this interesting approach, shall we instead adopt a more
skeptical stance and seek theoretical frameworks that we can use to
contextualize our own design thinking?

> In promoting Space and Articulation over symbolism and ornament,
> \[Modern architects\] distorted the whole building into a
> duck. (Venturi, Brown, and Izenour 1988, 163)

Let us too dispel a stylistic approach and yield that taxonomy to the
architectural historians. How does it help the designer to think about
styles like Modernism, Postmodernism or Deconstructionism? We are
engaged in using our imagination and experience to make *places* that
enhance the experiences and imagination of people. For that it seems
most useful to adopt empirical and sensate processes. You may be
familiar with the phrase "reverse engineering." This concept implies
sense making through intuition and inference of observed connections
that we disassemble. We learned above from Koberg and Bagnall (Koberg
and Bagnall (1981), 121) a three-step process: analysis, conception and
synthesis that allows us to reverse engineer what we *sense* is good
architecture and construct a simplified and useful theory framework for
design. You may note the three illustrations below that reflect
variously an idea about Formalism, Contextualism or Abstractionism are
not strictly speaking *architecture*. This is a deliberate choice. We
want to remain clear-eyed within our dialectic, so as not to conflate
architectural style with substantive theory.

> Spatial forms in architecture are neither Euclidean nor Einsteinian.
> In architecture spatial form means place, path and domain, that is,
> the concrete structure of man's environment. (Norberg-Schulz 1983, 5)

Finally, it is a frequent critique of a dialectical approach to say,
"That is a distinction without a difference." The three theories
presented below are limited by this critique, because it is possible to
identify overlapping theories evident in architecture. If we take a
pragmatic approach, then it is useful for our design thinking to qualify
these ideas with a preamble, such as "The **predominant** idea that
comes to the fore is..." Formalism, or Contextualism, or Abstractionism.
As a designer, you are wise to focus your efforts on one theory or line
of inquiry.

> "When everyone's super, no one will be." Syndrome (Bird 2004)

### Formalism: What is a Rational Object that Creates Our Sense of Place?

The title of this section uses the word rational. We should not confuse
this with *rationalism* discussed earlier that was characterized by
deduction, because we proceed with an empirical and *phenomena of
sense* approach. The word *rational* is derived from the
Latin *ratio* which was related to reasoning and calculation, and ratio
for us today means the proportion or relationship (measure?) between two
or more things. It is this latter idea that is architecturally
suggestive.

In space one dimension implies a line, two dimensions a plane and three
dimensions a volume. The most fundamental way to describe a sense of
place is to identify the *where* (x,y,z or GPS coordinates) and
the *what*, and the "what" of a place uses attributes like size, shape
and *form*. We may say that Formalism has a potential sense of place
because of the built environment object itself. The predominance of this
view of architecture is so ubiquitous that we could stop here without
learning much. For most people, of course, architecture is an object.
What distinguishes a formalistic approach to architecture implies
deliberate consideration for, and focus on, elements of size and shape,
proportion and balance, solid and void, etc. In other words, the
designer's intent is to foreground the ideas about the relationships
between objects.

These relationships are often a resultant of several transformations
available to a designer over a period of time. Imagine starting with a
proxy habitable object such as a three-meter cube volume. Transforms a
designer may apply include adding more forms, subtraction, stretching,
skewing, decimating, translating, juxtaposition, etc. The question for
you as the designer: How can I best communicate through drawing or
modeling those concepts of form by foregrounding the focused choices I
made and by diminishing any confounding noise and/or by moving the less
significant attributes to the background? What kinds of drawings best
illustrate my concepts? As you will see, sometimes a minimalist line
drawing without tone value, local color or rendering of light best
illuminates the design concepts.

### Contextualism: What Places Sustain Us Socially and Psychologically?

Phenomena of the social (focused on the group) and psychological
environments (inwardly focused on the individual) may be contrasted with
the natural environment. The social environment is bounded by the
group's institutional and cultural artifacts and is measured in
relationship to the individual and to the natural environment. The
psychological environment is the individual measured in relationship to
self. The natural environment is relatively unbounded.

It was already suggested that there is some overlap between the three
theories. Formalism described above focuses on size, shape and form and
foregrounds the transformations a designer makes. Contextualism may
appear to use Formalism transformations as well, in order to foreground
social and psychological ideas. It is important to remember that we are
asking the question *why?* in our inquiry about competing theories of
architectural design. What is the designer's intent?

> This implies that the meaning of any phenomenon is the context in
> which it appears, and that any man *is* the interrelationships or
> meanings which are accessible to him. The faculty of abstraction and
> generalization, or induction, is therefore the basic distinction of
> man, and the experience of *meaning* his basic need. To grow up
> signifies to become aware of meanings. (Norberg-Schulz 1983, 221)

Why and how do we seek communion with each other? The symbolism of
places of worship are rich with examples of Contextualism. How do we
gather together and trade provisions? The promenade of market day is a
triumph of the social construct and leaving behind our hunter-gatherer
days in exchange for and with the collective. Where do we share
knowledge and stories and cultural objects? Schools and playhouses and
museums weave the longevity of our shared tapestry of experiences and
archive them for future generations. It is natural then to look to these
environmental typologies for exemplars of Contextualism.

How do we as designers use the "interrelationships or meanings"
available to us? If we foreground context over the formal and abstract
methods, then we intend to connect people to places and to each other.
This is not just in a metaphorical sense. It is in a very real, physical
and objective way.

> We see, in summary, that every pattern we define must be formulated in
> the form of a rule which establishes a relationship between a context,
> system of forces which arises in that context, and a configuration
> which allows these forces to resolve themselves in that
> context. (Alexander 1979, 253)

Let's illustrate this method with a thought experiment: you and two
colleagues in our studio are working together on a competition design
project. Your team needs to make a shared workspace within an enormous
warehouse with high ceilings and large glass windows to the north and
south. You are given some movable privacy partitions, large work
surfaces, chairs, etc. It is understood there are other teams competing
against your team on the same floor. You arrange your setting to allow
for a private workspace so that you can focus, while having a view to
your team members. You shield views into your space for privacy without
blocking the natural light available from the windows. In your mind's
eye, do you see how setting a story and context allows your creative
design impulses to envision a resolution of forces? Do you understand
how this differs from foregrounding formal ideas?

### Abstractionism: What are Embedded Ideas that Transcend Our Place?

When discussing above a phenomenological and sensate idea of the
word *rational* within Formalism, it was a challenge not to conflate
that with a theory known as Rationalism. We face a similar dilemma with
the word *abstract*, because it too can be understood in the
epistemological view that knowledge is reasoned logically from
intellectual deduction. It may be helpful to draw the distinction
between *a priori* and *a posteriori* knowledge. Does our knowledge
proceed independently from experience, or is it arrived at through
experience? We are interested here in *making* immediate and useful
theory based in the sensate world.

> ...\[A\]rchitecture is engaged with fundamental existential questions.
> All experience implies the acts of recollecting, remembering and
> comparing. An embodied memory has an essential role as the basis of
> remembering a space or a place. . .. Architecture is the art of
> reconciliation between ourselves and the world, and this mediation
> takes place through the senses. (Pallasmaa 2005, 72)

The architect who enquires about abstract ideas in making *places* is at
once predictive of our transcendent responses to architecture and
tolerant and inviting of our unexpected feelings about the environment.
We may think of this as evocative and symbolic architecture. Again, we
face the critique of *distinction without a difference* between
Abstractionism and Contextualism, because sociological and psychological
context is often a tool of abstract reference. Our measure as before
will be the question, what was the idea that the designer intended to
bring to the fore?

In Rothko's paintings the color relationships, as they interact within
the rectangle and within the space, set up a gentle rhythmic pulsation.
The painting becomes both a focus for the spectator's meditations and a
screen before a mystery. (Lucie-Smith 1984, 42)

Between the two poles of *zeitgeist* (Rationalism) and *genius
loci* (Empiricism), the architectural designer navigates toward meaning.
This work consults the genius of place and is adapted to the specific
interrelationships as we saw with Contextualism.

> Consult the Genius of the Place in all;\
> That tells the Waters or to rise, or fall, (Pope 2020, 81)

A procession through a church nave simulates a journey. A dramatic
swooping roof of an airport terminal sends the imagination to flight. A
science institute commemorating Einstein is a lighthouse. Abstractionism
in architecture foregrounds the similarities of our experiences from a
set of contexts. We learned from Koberg and Bagnall about a process
involving taking an idea apart, asking what it means in its essence, and
then reimagining that idea for the new context. Another word for this
is *abstraction*, and the method is called analogical reasoning.

Whenever we encounter something we do not understand, it is a natural
reaction to try to understand it by reference to something that is
familiar to us...the reasoning presupposes an analogy between two things
(objects, classes of objects, situations, relationships), one of which
is familiar and one unfamiliar. (Hughes and Lavery 2004, 206--7)

What makes this type of architecture challenging is the reliance on
interpretation for the conceptual abstractions. Are the observations
about the familiar relatable and transmutable to the unfamiliar? The
risk for the designer is that the vision is too personal or esoteric,
and it does not translate. Sometimes the results are sublime and
sometimes merely *interesting*... or, banal! When our ideas reach out
only to the few, then we may fairly be called elitist. When our ideas
pursue only a personal vision, then we are self-absorbed. The successful
architect finds that transcendent ideas resonate and activate the social
and psychological sensate impulses of the many.

Abstractionism encompasses the metaphoric and transcendent architecture
grounded in, informed by, and abstracted from a specific context.

## Storytelling and Simulation for Pre-Design

Architecture is commonly understood to comprise art and science and
technology in varying degrees. Architects and engineering professionals
come to embody these ideals in temperament and personality. We have a
need to be well educated in the arts, and in storytelling and having
visioning aptitudes. Equally, we are steeped in knowledge of Newtonian
physics, material sciences and measurement through simulation and
calculation. If society tends to dichotomize the arts and the sciences,
on the other hand, we must be polymaths, of extraordinarily broad and
comprehensive knowledge. We are not always specialists, yet we have
specialized knowledge of technological tools and the technology of
building.

Before we get started you may be interested in why these exercises were
chosen. As mentioned before, as professionals we should endeavor to be
skeptical about how we spend our most valuable resource, our time and
attention. It may sound irreverent, yet wouldn't you like to ask your
professor, "Why should I care?" In each of the exercises and sketches,
there is a section that addresses this *rhetorical* question called
Learning. Read this brief explanation first of Learning Objectives and
compare the ideas with the Learning section in each exercise and sketch.

### Learning and Accreditation

Architecture (NAAB) and architectural engineering (ABET) programs are
accredited in the United States. Accredited programs must demonstrate
that students attain several program and learning outcomes. The course
of study in *Contemporary Practices in Architectural Drawing and
Illustration* contributes to two of the learning outcomes. The National
Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB) evaluates architecture programs
in the United States. Of the six student learning objectives and
outcomes, "SC.5 Design Synthesis" addresses:

> How the program ensures that students develop the ability to make
> design decisions within architectural projects while demonstrating
> synthesis of user requirements, regulatory requirements, site
> conditions, and accessible design, and consideration of the measurable
> environmental impacts of their design decisions. (NAAB 2020, 4)

The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) evaluates
engineering programs in the US. "Criterion 3 Student Outcomes" describes
seven outcomes, and "Outcome 3" addresses:

> an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET
> 2020)

Let us also consider learning outcomes at a more granular level. For
this we will use an analogue of a programming paradigm called
object-oriented programming. An object is an instance of a class and can
contain data fields thought of as attributes and functions also known as
methods. In addition, these programs allow for *inheritance* of other
objects that bring along corresponding attributes and methods. For
instance, using a popular language like JavaScript here is a simple
program.

\<Insert Text Box Here: monospace font as code\>

1 function SomeObject(key, key1) {

2 this.key = key;

3 this.key1 = key1;

4 }

5

6 let Thing = new SomeObject(\"value\", 2020);

7 let myThing = new SomeObject(\"Eric\", 1988);

8

9 console.log(Thing);

10 console.log(myThing.key, myThing.key1);

Evaluating this program results in the console printing two lines:

\<Insert Text Box Here: monospace font as code\>

\> Object { key: \"value\", key1: 2020 }

\> Eric 1988

At first glance this is a lot of programming effort to assign some
values. If you use your imagination, however it should be evident how
powerful this idea of inheritance can be for modular program design. It
can also be a powerful idea in the architectural studio, where the
design learning outcomes inherit the properties of the student learning
outcomes and program outcomes. Since design learning outcomes (DLO)
"inherit" attributes and methods of the program and learning outcomes, A
DLO can be considered a kind of teaching hypothesis. We should seek the
kinds of meaningful outcome objectives that could be "tested" or
measured. See the Criteria section in each exercise and sketch problem
for a rubric used to assess and measure *success* for each module.

Now that we are equipped with a basic toolbox of design ideas let's get
to work building some projects. In the exercises and sketch problems
that follow we will work with watercolors, digital painting,
observational drawing, paper models and electronic models. Each project
you do reflects a contemporary and real-world illustration that you can
expect do in a professional setting. The projects share a common section
outline:

-   Introduction

-   Learning

-   Scenario

-   Materials

-   Steps

-   Tips

-   Criteria

-   Related Assignments

## Sketch J. Watercolor Storyboard of Twelve Site Context Vignettes

### Introduction

How does an architect start the design process? Most architects would
agree that until we visit a site, a project has not yet begun. The site
visit has a powerful impact on all decisions. Let's compare the
architect's first site visit with making a movie. Film directors make
storyboards. These visual sketches of the script document a plan for
shooting a scene. They provide guidelines and cues for simulating ahead
of time how to construct complex lighting, sound, movements, etc.
Storyboards bridge the medium of a text script with an acted story.
Since a film director and an architect creatively simulate scenes, then
architects may benefit from creative tools used in movie making.

Drawing is simulation. If you are a director, then storyboards simulate
filming actors in dialogue before the time when the director yells,
"Action!". For a painter:

> "\[T\]he drawing is almost like a rehearsal of what's going to
> happen." (Santos 2020, Timestamp 3:11)

For an architect drawing simulates habitation of the built environment
ahead of construction. Matthew Brehm made the case for sketching the
environment when he described in detail the role of the Grand Tour in
the development of 17th to 19th century architectural education.

> "Sketching developed further as a form of study during the time of the
> Grand Tour...recording through sketching and measured drawings was a
> significant component of the tour." (Brehm 2012, 6)

We can imagine how the sketchbooks became for those architects a
simulation for the later architectural designs they would make, and a
personal encyclopedia of exemplary forms and details. How then shall we
simulate and record our first impressions of an architectural site we
visit? Unless you are working without a specific site, or perhaps on a
prototype design that must fit many sites, then the experiences you feel
when visiting a location are unique and can inspire your architectural
design. Storyboarding a site visit embeds and communicates an
experience.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   ... to conceptualize my design decisions within a context of the
    site conditions including orientation, topography, built environment
    placement, regulatory requirements, accessibility, environmental
    impacts, approach sequence, vegetation, view sheds, etc.

-   ... to visualize a sequence of observed site conditions, translate
    observations to envisioned experiences and communicate ideas both to
    others and to myself, as I design the narrative of user interactions
    necessary for creating a "sense of place."

### Scenario

Since we discussed Contextualism as a theory above, let's put those
ideas to work. With your critical eye search the site for social and
psychological ideas that you observe. It is hard to think this way at
first. Once you sensitize your *vision* to this filtered approach,
you'll learn all kinds of things. Let's analyze the example provided for
you.

The series of images comes from a day spent at Shaker Village of
Pleasant Hill Kentucky on Veteran's Day 2009. The image is presented in
the middle of the process. The first three images are rendered in
watercolor over the fountain pen and blue-black permanent ink. The
remaining nine images show the line rendered stage. Instead of
describing the history of the Shaker community, let's focus on the
thumbnail sketches. It is late autumn and a sugar maple by the lake
blazes red leaves. The next two scenes establish the importance of the
rural fencing types, wood post and rail and stacked stone. Simple gable
roofs cap the cubic vernacular forms with punched openings. Materials
are wood and stone. Scenes are cropped to show overall formal
arrangements and also closer texture and details. The scenes all point
to the important values of the now gone Utopian community: simplicity,
craftsmanship, serenity and humility. If you see even more things not
here described, then the storyboards are working!

This assignment is based on readings from Drawing Shortcuts by Jim
Leggitt. (Leggitt 2010, 12--47) The finished image shall be 12\" x 9\"
(i.e. 864px and 648px.) The image shall be composed of 12 "thumbnail"
storyboard vignettes drawn from direct observation. Each thumbnail shall
be 2.25\" square (i.e. 413px.)

The sequence of images shall be arranged in storytelling order (e.g.,
chronological, thematic, etc.) The matrix shall be in landscape format
with three rows of four squares and separated by 0.5\" (i.e. 36px.) Line
work including tone and value shall be felt-tip marker. Color shall be
illustrator's choice (e.g. wet or dry media.)

### Materials

-   Sketchbook

-   Pen

-   Wet or dry color media

### Steps

1.  Prepare a blank piece of sturdy watercolor paper for your field
    trip. Draft the thumbnail matrix as described in pencil. A
    professional matrix layout is consistently spaced and precisely
    delineated. For your convenience, a vector drawing (i.e., svg file)
    has been included in the "Tips" section that you can trace.

2.  While on site block in the thumbnail scene that you have framed, and
    do not forget to take a photograph of the same scene for later
    reference. Proceed in your site visit in chronological order.
    Balance your selected views to tell a comprehensive story of the
    entire site and limited to 12 squares. Using your blocked-in
    thumbnail pencil sketches and photographic references prepare your
    drawing in the studio for line rendering in felt tip pen (i.e., 1.0
    mm or less nib size.)

3.  Thinking ahead to your color rendering material of choice (e.g.,
    water or solvent based,) select a felt tip marker of the opposite
    choice to your color render material. For example, if you do not
    want your permanent ink felt tip pen to run, then watercolor is a
    better choice. The reverse is true if using a water based felt tip
    pen...use a solvent based marker.

4.  Using we media such as watercolor or chisel point marker, render
    color. You may also render using a digital program.

5.  Photograph your final image under outside lighting conditions. In
    order to reduce glare, then find a spot in shade where no obscuring
    shadows fall on your image.

6.  In a raster editing program such as GIMP, open your photograph as a
    layer. Correct for color aberrations using the "pick gray scale for
    all channels" method in the Levels tool. Make other adjustments
    (e.g., Exposure, Sharpening with High Pass Filter, and Saturation,
    etc.). Save your working file.

7.  Make a copy and flatten the images. Scale image to meet the above
    specification. Export file as portable network graphics (i.e., png)
    file.

### Tips

-   My personal preference for color markers is the solvent-based brand
    called Chartpak AD. There are several comparable manufacturers
    (e.g. Prismacolor, Faber Castell, etc.) Some are water-based, and
    some are solvent-based. The markers I use are the Chartpak Ad Marker
    Sets - Architectural, Set of 25

-   Watercolors may be used for this assignment. Color and felt-tip line
    work can often be incompatible together, and the way I remember
    compatibility is to select opposites for the best results
    (e.g. solvent-based felt-tip line work + water-based color marker,
    or water-based felt-tip line work + solvent-based color marker.

\<Insert Figure 0131matrixResource.svg\>

Figure 1.3.1: Resource Guide for Tracing Storyboard Matrix

### Criteria

  **DLO**             **Advanced (4 pts)**                                                                                                                                                                   **Proficient (3 pts)**                                                                                                                                          **Developing (2 pts)**                                                                                                                    **Beginner (1 pt)**
  ------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Site conditions     Designer demonstrates comprehensive understanding of the site conditions that impact design decisions                                                                                  Designer demonstrates some competency in identifying the site conditions that impact design decisions                                                           Designer identifies only a few of the site conditions that impact design decisions                                                        Designer does not demonstrate understanding of the site conditions that impact design decisions
  User requirements   Designer demonstrates comprehensive understanding of the user requirements that impact design decisions                                                                                Designer demonstrates some competency in identifying the user requirements that impact design decisions                                                         Designer identifies only a few of the user requirements that impact design decisions                                                      Designer does not demonstrate understanding of the user requirements that impact design decisions
  Communication       Student demonstrates a professional communication aptitude                                                                                                                             Student demonstrates a competent level of communication skills                                                                                                  Student demonstrates a limited competency in communicating ideas                                                                          Student does not demonstrate competency in communicating ideas
  Craft               Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                           Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                          Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                   Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is inconsistent.
  Line                Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Lines are controlled and evoke both power and subtlety. Line is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.   Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Linework does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Lines are consistent and well-crafted. Linework has some non-contributing attributes.   Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Lines are inconsistent and lack attention to craft.
  Professionalism     Illustrator completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                  Illustrator completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                      Illustrator generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                               Illustrator is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.

### Related Assignments

-   Sketch K. Formal Precedent Study. Thumbnail Sketch to Contour
    Drawing

-   Exercise Fifteen. Electronic Site Contour Model and Three Proposed
    Places
