## Sketch N. Interior Perspective Vignette

\<Insert Figure 3.1.4\>

Figure 3.4 Sketch N. Interior Perspective Vignette

### Introduction

This assignment asks you to explore a sketch language of minimal line
work and "unbounded" or frameless vignettes. This assignment helps you
to prepare interior perspectives that explain the user experiences of
your design project. Several minimalist sketch styles are exemplified in
the work of Francis Ching, Leon and Rob Krier, Michael Graves, etc. In
studio we will analyze the implied object shapes of several
sketch *vignettes* (i.e., not rectangle frames.) Here is what the author
of your textbook said about the sketch vignette?

> ...the drawing fades from its detailed central image. Where there is
> less detail, there is a hint as to how the image might continue. (Yee
> 2007)

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

... to directly observe shape and forms and measure and translate the
spatial scene accurately from an implied image plane to a proportionally
scaled drawn surface.

... to control line weight and consistency (e.g., width, continuity, and
control.)

### Scenario

Architects and engineers focus on several elements of design including
site, context, form, user needs, materials, comfort, etc. The entry
points for architectural experimentation are many and can overwhelm a
new student. One effective technique professionals use to clarify design
ideas is to filter out parameters that are not in focus now. While it is
evident that all architectural elements must ultimately synthesize,
evolve, and interrelate together, our comprehensive designs are often
built-in iterations from the general to the specific and over time.

The experience of the user and interactions within the volumetric space
are a significant element we should explore. Our area of study here
challenges us to create a quick interior vignette sketch from within an
important space in our design. Consider a couple of alternates before
you settle on the view you will draw. Examples could include a view
looking across the main work studio through the large sliding glazed
wall system and to the outside and the lake view. Alternatively, a
meeting room with client drawings spread over a large conference table
may be your *money* space to show.

Simulation of the user experience through drawings, models, and
animations are the predominant ways we engage with our clients. This is
because it takes years of specialized training to read technical,
made-for-construction drawings and to have the facility to imagine
(i.e., from a floor plan) how it would feel to move around in a space.
Especially during the design phase of a project, we draw make
presentations that allow our clients to enter the imaginative world of
"what could be."

### Materials

-   Felt-tip pen

-   Sketchbook

-   Perspective prints from electronic model of your project (i.e.,
    Blender, SketchUp, etc.)

### Steps

1.  Navigate within your electronic model and identify one good interior
    viewpoint.

2.  You may also choose to first cut a section plane to view inside of
    your structure.

3.  Be sure to include people, furniture, and other entourage, in order
    to elicit an experiential perspective.

4.  Export your 2D image and print to approximately 5" x 7" (i.e.,
    720px. X 1008px. at 144 dpi.)

5.  Overlay a piece of tracing paper and develop a contour line vignette
    of a view. Remember: no tone-value or color...only contour lines.

### Tips

1.  Electronic modeling programs have several render output formats
    (e.g., raster image, vector image, animation, etc.) Which format you
    choose is dependent on how you want to use the render. For our
    purposes here either a "png" raster file or "svg" vector file will
    work. Even a screen capture direct to inkjet printer is adequate for
    this rapid workflow.

2.  Saving multiple camera views within the electronic model program can
    aid in image selection.

3.  Using a layer mask from within an image editing program can
    facilitate the *design* of the vignette polygon boundary. Recall
    that we are trying to break out of the *postcard* rectangle box and
    simulate a fading vignette effect.

### Criteria

  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                

### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Fifteen. Electronic Site Contour Model and Three Proposed
    Places

-   Exercise Sixteen. An Aerial Flyover Animation of Your Selected Place

