## Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

### Introduction

![Sketch B](images/03011fieldSketchChair.png)

Figure 3.1.1: Sketch B. Field Sketch of a Chair

Select a chair to document in a drafted plan, front elevation, and side
elevation. Begin by measuring the chair and recording the dimensions in
your sketchbook. Make quick sketches and detail views to record
important information. Use these "working drawings" to develop the final
drafted views.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

> ... to analyze the built environment and apply measured drawing skills
> that include plans and elevations, illustrating line quality, drawing
> notation and dimensioning.

### Scenario

Going out to the field and measuring existing conditions is one of the
most common activities in a professional design office. The first step
in most projects is to photograph, measure and make drawings with notes.
These field notes are a valuable resource back in the office when we
begin to make the technical drawings.

Since most technical drawings that designers produce for construction
are orthographic, then a good skill to develop is the translation
through drawing of three-dimensional spatial conditions to
two-dimensional projections, such as plans, sections and elevations.

As a professional architect who teaches architecture and engineering
students, I am often asked by people outside of the profession why we
still learn drawing by hand. In an age of computer-aided drawing, why
would a student want to know how to draw by hand when the computer is so
excellent? There are so many answers to this question, and we'll talk
about one of them now. The field sketch of existing conditions is the
most efficient, effective and inexpensive method for verifying and
beginning a construction project. These field sketches and early
photographs are so important to the project, that they are kept in the
official job file, not to be discarded. They are an important component
of the construction documents and are legal documents in practice. We
should learn together how to gather good documentation and make
effective sketches.

In this assignment, we'll work on a single object: a complex chair. In
several assignments coming up, we'll apply these skills to room plans,
elevations and sections in preparation for our first construction
document drawing.

### Materials

-   Phone camera or digital camera

-   Pencil

-   Tape measure

-   Sketchbook

-   1:96 Isometric Grid Paper

-   1:48 Grid Paper

### Steps

1.  Select a complex chair. A good source for your selection is an
    office chair with rolling casters. This offers the challenge of
    non-uniform shapes and complex mechanisms that make your drawing a
    more rewarding challenge than a three-legged stool for instance.

2.  With a tape measure, identify the overall height, width and chair
    dimensions. Construct a three-dimensional box of these lengths using
    the provided isometric grid. Drawing this grid freehand and with the
    isometric grid promotes sketching precision without the need for
    drafting tools.

3.  Photograph your chair from approximately the same oblique view that
    you drew the isometric container box. It is useful to also
    photograph a top view and front and side views, because these are
    the views you will draft in the related assignment, Exercise Four.
    Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection of Complex
    Chair.

4.  Transfer the silhouette (outline) of the projected view for each of
    three drawings: top view, front elevation and side elevation.
    Concentrate on the proportions of the silhouette. Sketch these on
    each of the visible faces of the isometric box. Recall that these
    are orthographic drawings, and that no perspective distortion should
    be evident.

5.  Redraw the three views on the 1:48 grid paper. The experience should
    be one of flattening the three-dimensional chair as a projection
    first on the box, and then enlarging that map at twice the scale.
    Make several notes as to materials and relevant descriptive ideas
    about the chair.

6.  Taking our analysis from the general to the specific, use the tape
    measure and take important inner dimensions and note important
    relationships. We are learning to see the chair objectively. Include
    dimensional information about the inner elements and details. When
    we do our final drawing project for the chair in Exercise Four, we
    will again redraw the three views and enlarge them to 1:12 scale.

7.  Collect all sketches and photographs together. Digitize all of the
    imagery you have made and analyses that you documented and compose
    them together onto one board. The final submission should be saved
    as a raster image with pixel dimensions 1224 px by 792 px.

### Tips

-   Recall that these are orthographic drawings, and that no perspective
    distortion should be evident.

-   Taking a large clipboard to the field is useful in providing a
    mobile and hard surface to draw.

-   Photograph everything about the chair. You will be glad to have the
    information when back in the studio.

### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Related Assignments

-   Exercise Four. Hand Drafting an Orthographic Multi-view Projection
    of Complex Chair

-   Sketch C. Field Sketches of Floor Plans of Five Large Rooms

-   Sketch D. Field Sketches of Two Exterior Elevations of Large
    Buildings

-   Sketch E. Field Sketches of Two Interior Elevations of Large Rooms

-   Sketch F. Field Sketches of Five Partial Interior Sections of Large
    Room

-   Exercise Seven. Interior Construction Drawing. Floor Plan and
    Interior Elevations
