## Exercise Sixteen. An Aerial Flyover Animation of Your Selected Place

\<Insert Figure 1.3.6_exerciseSixteen\>

Figure 1.3.6: Exercise Sixteen. An Aerial Flyover Animation of Your
Selected Place

### Introduction

You have modeled the site contours in an electronic modeling software
and have proposed at least three possible locations on the site for your
design of \"workshop for drawing\" in *Exercise Fifteen. Electronic Site
Contour Model and Three Proposed Places*. Using your preferred location,
model first a concrete retaining wall and a concrete pad from the
provided design in *Figure 1.3.7 Mechanical Pad Design*. We will cover
the design and sizing parameters during lecture (see also below in the
Steps section.) Place a deck of wood framed design directly over the
concrete mechanical pad. The decking will form the floor of your
workshop. Model in SketchUp or Blender your design to a 100 level of
detail (LOD.) The deliverable for this exercise is an animated GIF.
Refer to the Steps section for setup and export options.

\<Insert Figure 1.3.7_mechanicalPad\>

Figure 1.3.7: Mechanical Pad Design

### Scenario

A common tool for understanding modeling requirements comes from
architectural engineering and construction (AEC) industry organizations,
particularly the American Institute of Architects (AIA). There are five
different levels of development (LOD) when modeling: 100, 200, 300, 400,
and 500. The simple way to understand this is to ask how much detail is
necessary at a given stage of design. Imagine you are presenting your
work to a client. It is the first meeting. What are the main questions:
Where is the project located on the site? What is the orientation? How
are you capitalizing on the views? Prevailing winds? Solar gain? Your
electronic model should show the primary geometric form of the proposal.
This may include the primary shape of the roof design. It may or may not
include fenestration (e.g., windows and door openings.) Material details
are rarely relevant at this first meeting! No details are relevant. A
100-level of development is used during the pre-design phase of a
project and may be described as a conceptual model that shows height,
area, volume, orientation, and location. We may think of this as a proxy
design...a point of beginning.

### Learning

This assignment module contributes to the following design learning
outcomes, which finish the sentence "As a successful student in this
course, I am now able..."

-   "... make an animation from a complex electronic model of an
    architectural system, apply materials, textures, and lighting
    sources, and output a photorealistic rendering of the scene."

### Materials

-   Electronic Modeling Program (e.g., SketchUp and Blender)

-   Mechanical Pad Design

-   GIMP

### Steps

1.  Using your design from Exercise Fifteen, identify the approximate
    project location in the SketchUp or Blender model. Determine
    6\"-thick concrete pad dimensions (i.e., make it the same footprint
    as your design.)

2.  Position concrete pad under project as simplified footprint on site
    and design a 12\" wide retaining wall holding back the upward
    sloping soil, to depress pad so that it \"daylights\" about six
    inches above the front of the building edge.

3.  Create column supports and deck in coordination with structural
    retaining wall. Place wood deck construction so that the floor
    height is about the same as the top of the retaining wall.

4.  Build 100-level (LOD) model on deck. Project shall be both
    economical in construction and fully accessible. This predicts a
    one-story-only design.

5.  Using tools in SketchUp or Blender, create a five-scene fly-around
    animation and export at a rate of 5 fps several PNG files (i.e.,
    30-35 images.)

6.  Open all files as layers in GIMP. Sort layers in correct order.
    Export as GIF animation.

### Tips

1.  While SketchUp and Blender are not fully building information
    modeling (BIM) programs, you will benefit from simulating workflows
    used in BIM. Specifically, it is important to work in *Components*
    (SketchUp) and *Collections* (Blender.) The best way to envision
    this workflow is to think of nesting a drawing inside another
    drawing.

2.  Building on the previous tip: the author enjoys a process of
    building a model of separate components. Close the model. Open
    another new model, perhaps called something like *assembly*, and
    importing the separate component models inside of the assembly
    model.

3.  Suggested order of operations for your mechanical concrete pad could
    therefore be an assemblage of the following component models:

-   Spread Footing

-   Footing Wall

-   Concrete Slab

-   Concrete Retaining Wall

-   Concrete Columns

-   Double Wood Sill Plate

-   Double Wood Beam (Girder)

-   Wood Joists

### Criteria

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
  DLO               Advanced (4 pts)                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proficient (3 pts)                                                                                                                                                                     Developing (2 pts)                                                                                                                                    Beginner (1 pt)                                                                                                                                  
  Craft             Illustrator demonstrates exemplary attention to work product and excellence.                                                                                                                                         Illustrator demonstrates good attention and care towards work product.                                                                                                                 Illustrator completes work, but the product seems rushed to completion.                                                                               Illustrator demonstrates attention towards work product, but work quality is                                                                     
  Rendering         Illustrator uses line to hold the viewer\'s attention. Image is controlled and evokes both power and subtlety. Image is descriptive and/or symbolic and supports compositional goals.                                Illustrator\'s line work demonstrates several professional attributes. Rendering style does not distract the viewer and generally supports compositional objectives.                   Illustrator\'s use of line is somewhat effective. Rendering style is consistent and competent. There are some non-contributing attributes.            Illustrator attempts to use line descriptively. Rendering is inconsistent and lacks attention to craft.                                          
  Technical         Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Professional conventions are followed, inclusive of line weight, orthographic and dimensional information.   Illustrator observes and analyzes object data and translates it to a meaningful graphic representation. Most professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator is challenged to observe and analyze object data correctly. Few professional conventions are followed, and some information is missing.   Illustrator attempts to observe and analyze object data and representation is inconsistent. Professional drawing conventions are not followed.   
  Professionalism   Student completes the work on time. Work demonstrates exemplary attention to learning objectives.                                                                                                                    Student completes the work on time and demonstrates a good work ethic.                                                                                                                 Student generally completes the work at a minimum level of expectation.                                                                               Student is missing parts of the work and makes a plan for completion of the remaining assignment.                                                
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --

### Related Assignments

-   Sketch J. Watercolor Storyboard of Twelve Site Context Vignettes

-   Exercise Fourteen. Physical Paper Model of Formal Precedent

-   Exercise Fifteen. Electronic Site Contour Model and Three Proposed
    Places

-   Exercise Seventeen. Multi-view Construction Drawing
