Figure Exercise Seventeen. Multi-view Construction Drawing

### Introduction

Up to this point in the project, you have been designing in
three-dimensional views whether on sketching paper or in the model. This
assignment will focus on refining several design elements. The design
refinements shall be represented in seven orthogonal views each drawn at
1/8"=1'-0" (i.e., 1:96.) Provide one plan section, which is cut
approximately 3'-4\" (1m) above the finish floor grade. Provide four
elevations. Provide one longitudinal section (i.e., cut along the
north-south axis.) Provide one lateral section (i.e., cut along the
east-west axis.) Consider that these drawings must be presentation
quality and shall be shown to a client. Compose all drawings together on
a single sheet as demonstrated during class.

### Question

Up to this point in the project, you have been designing in
three-dimensional views whether on sketching paper or in the model. This
exercise will focus on refining several design elements. The design
refinements shall be represented in seven orthogonal views each drawn at
1/8"=1'-0" (i.e., 1:96.) Provide one plan section, which is cut
approximately 3'-4\" (one meter) above the first-floor grade. Provide
four elevations. Provide one longitudinal section (i.e., cut along the
north-south axis.) Provide one lateral section (i.e., cut along the
east-west axis.) Consider that these drawings must be presentation
quality and shall be shown to a client. Compose all drawings together on
a single sheet as demonstrated during studio.
